See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309203898

The Validity and Utility of Selection Methods in
Personnel Psychology: Practical and Theoretical
Implications of 100 Years...

Working Paper · October 2016

DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.18843.26400

CITATIONS                                                                              READS

0                                                                                      587

1 author:
            Frank L. Schmidt
            University of Iowa
             222 PUBLICATIONS 26,512 CITATIONS

                   SEE PROFILE

All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate,         Available from: Frank L. Schmidt
letting you access and read them immediately.                                                 Retrieved on: 15 November 2016
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods                                             1

Running Head: Validity and Utility of Selection Methods

                             Working Paper

The Validity and Utility of Selection Methods in Personnel Psychology: Practical and
               Theoretical Implications of 100 Years of Research Findings

Frank L. Schmidt
University of Iowa

    In-Sue Oh
Temple University

    Jonathan A. Shaffer
West Texas A&M University

* This working paper was prepared as an update to Schmidt and Hunter (1998). We have
made it available on Research Gate and SSRN because of repeated requests for such
updates from practitioners and researchers from all over the world. We intend to publish a
version of this paper later.

Authors' Note. Frank L. Schmidt, Department of Management and Organizations, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, and Gallup Organization; In-Sue Oh, Department of Human
Resource Management, Fox School of Business, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122.
Email: insue.oh@temple.edu; Jonathan Shaffer, Department of Management Marketing, and
General Business, College of Business, West Texas A&M University. Email:
jshaffer@wtamu.edu. Enquiries concerning this paper should be sent to Frank L. Schmidt,
Department of Management and Organizations, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242. Email:
frank-schmidt@uiowa.edu
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  2

                                                     Abstract
This paper summarizes the practical and theoretical implications of 100 years of research in
personnel selection. On the basis of meta-analytic findings, this paper presents the validity of 31
procedures for predicting job performance and the validity of paired combinations of general
mental ability (GMA) and the 29 other selection procedures. Similar analyses are presented for
16 predictors of performance in job training programs. Overall, the two combinations with the
highest multivariate validity and utility for predicting job performance were GMA plus an
integrity test (mean validity of .78) and GMA plus a structured interview (mean validity of .76).
Similar results were obtained for these two combinations in the prediction of performance in job
training programs. A further advantage of these two combinations is that they can be used for
both entry level hiring and selection of experienced job applicants. The practical utility
implications of these summary findings are substantial. The implications of these research
findings for the development of theories of job performance are discussed.
Keywords: personnel selection, meta-analysis, validity generalization, selection utility, job
performance.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  3

         This paper is an update of Schmidt and Hunter (1998), which summarized 85 years of
research findings on the validity of job selection methods up to 1998. That article that has been
cited over 3,400 times, suggesting that an update of findings would be of interest to researchers,
practitioners, and employers. The ensuing period of nearly 20 years has indeed seen
methodological developments and additional research findings that refine and improve the
accuracy of the validity estimates presented in the 1998 article. During this time, a new and
more accurate procedure for correcting for the downward bias caused by range restriction has
become available (Hunter, Schmidt, & Le, 2006). This more accurate procedure has revealed that
the older, less accurate procedure had substantially underestimated the validity of general mental
ability (GMA) and specific cognitive aptitudes (e.g., verbal ability, quantitative ability, etc.;
Schmidt, Oh, & Le, 2006). Also, the increased availability of primary validity studies has
allowed new and expanded meta-analyses of some selection methods, refining and changing
some of the validity estimates for the prediction of job performance. For some personnel
measures, these new data have produced important changes in estimated validity and incremental
validity over GMA. For example, an expanded meta-analysis shows that job sample or work
sample tests are somewhat less valid than had been indicated by the older data. Also, meta-
analytic results are now available for some newer predictors not included in the 1998 article.
These include Situational Judgment Tests (SJTs), college and graduate school grade point
average (GPA), phone-based structured employment interviews, measures of "emotional
intelligence", person-job fit measures, person-organization fit measures, and self-report measures
of the Big Five personality traits.

         We present the 31 personal selection procedures used to predict job performance in the
order of their incremental validity (if any) produced over that of GMA. We also present the
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  4

mean zero order operational validity of each procedure as revealed by meta-analyses. We present
this information for 16 procedures used to predict performance in job training programs in the
same manner. Results show that many procedures that are valid predictors of job performance
nevertheless have little or no incremental validity over that of GMA. The rank order for zero
order validity is different from the rank order for incremental validity. Also, the incremental
validity of most procedures is smaller than reported in Schmidt and Hunter (1998). This
reduction in apparent incremental validity results from the increase in the estimated validity of
GMA resulting from use of the more accurate correction for range restriction (Hunter et al.,
2006; Hunter & Schmidt, 2004; Schmidt & Hunter, 2015). At the time of the earlier 1998 article,
it was apparent that GMA plays a central role in the determination of both job and training
performance. However, the more accurate updated findings indicate that the dominance of GMA
is greater than previously believed.

         The nature of the improvement in the correction for range restriction requires comment.
Up until about 2006, all corrections for range restriction were based on the assumption of direct
range restriction; that is, on the assumption of direct truncation on the predictor scores (i.e., all
above the cut score were hired and all below were rejected). The correction used was
Thorndike's Case II; Thorndike, 1949). It has long been known that this assumption was false
and that virtually all range restriction in hiring was indirect in nature. That is, it was known that
applicants were almost always hired based on a combination or composite of different factors
and this composite was correlated with the selection method being studied, creating indirect
range restriction on it. Hunter et al. (2006) presented a method for correcting for indirect range
restriction that was widely usable because it did not require the typically unavailable information
required to implement the older correction for indirect range restriction (Thorndike's Case III;
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  5

Thorndike, 1949). Simulation studies showed this procedure was appreciably more accurate than
Thorndike's Case II (Le & Schmidt, 2006), and revealed that Thorndike's Case II substantially
underestimated validity in the presence of indirect range restriction.1

         From the point of view of practical value, the most important property of a personnel
assessment method is predictive validity: the ability to predict future job performance, job-
related learning (such as amount learned in training and development programs), and other
criteria. The predictive validity coefficient is directly proportional to the practical economic
value (utility) of the assessment method (Brogden, 1949; Schmidt, Hunter, McKenzie, &
Muldrow, 1979). Use of hiring methods with increased predictive validity leads to substantial
increases in employee performance as measured in percentage increases in output, increased
monetary value of output, and increased learning of job-related skills (Hunter, Schmidt, &
Judiesch, 1990).

         Today, the validity of different personnel measures can be calibrated via the application
of meta-analysis to 100 years of research studies. The most well-known conclusion from this
research is that for hiring employees without previous experience in the job the most valid
predictor of future performance and learning is general mental ability (GMA, i.e., intelligence or
general cognitive ability; Brown, Le, & Schmidt, 2006; Hunter & Hunter, 1984; Hunter et al.,
2006; Ree & Earles, 1992; Schmidt, Shaffer, & Oh, 2008). GMA can be measured using
commercially available tests. However, many other measures can also contribute to the overall
validity of the selection process. These include, for example, employment interviews and
measures of conscientiousness and personal integrity.

         This paper examines and summarizes what nearly 100 years of research in personnel
psychology has revealed about the validity of measures of 31 different selection methods that can
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  6

be used in making decisions about hiring, training, and developmental assignments. In addition,
this paper examines how well certain combinations of these methods work. These 31 procedures
do not all work equally well; the research evidence indicates that some work very well and some
work very poorly. Measures of GMA work very well and graphology, for example, does not
work at all. The cumulative findings show that the research knowledge now available makes it
possible for employers today to substantially increase the productivity, output, and learning
ability of their workforces by using procedures that work well and by avoiding those that do not.
Making this information available to employers and practitioners is important in light of research
showing that the gap between research findings and real world practices is greater in the
selection and staffing area than in any other area of human resource management (Rynes,
Colbert & Brown, 2002; Rynes, Giluk, & Brown, 2007). Finally, we look at the implications of
these research findings for the development of theories of job performance.

                  Determinants of Practical Value (Utility) of Selection Methods
         The validity of a hiring method is a direct determinant of its practical value, but it is not
the only determinant. Another direct determinant is the variability of job performance. At one
extreme, if variability were zero, then all applicants would have exactly the same level of later
job performance if hired. In this case, the practical value or utility of all selection procedures
would be zero. In such a hypothetical case, it does not matter who is hired, because all workers
are the same. At the other extreme, if performance variability is very large, it then becomes
important to hire the best performing applicants and the practical utility of valid selection
methods is very large. As it happens, this "extreme" case appears to be the reality for most jobs.
Research has shown that the variability of performance and output among (incumbent) workers
is very large and that it would be even larger if all job applicants were hired or if job applicants
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  7

were selected randomly from among those that apply (cf. Hunter et al., 1990; Schmidt & Hunter,
1983; Schmidt et al., 1979). This latter variability is called the applicant pool variability, and in
hiring this is the variability that operates to determine practical value. This is because one is
selecting new employees from the applicant pool, not from among those already on the job in
question.

         The variability of employee job performance can be measured in a number of ways, but
two scales have typically been used: dollar value of output and output as a percentage of mean
output. The standard deviation across individuals of the dollar value of output (called !) has
been found to be at minimum 40% of the mean salary of the job (Schmidt & Hunter, 1983;
Schmidt et al., 1979; Schmidt, Mack, & Hunter, 1984). The 40% figure is a lower bound value;
actual values are typically considerably higher. Thus, if the average salary for a job is $40,000,
then ! is at least $16,000. If performance has a normal distribution, then workers at the 84th
percentile produce output worth $16,000 more per year than average workers (i.e., those at the
50th percentile). And the difference between workers at the 16th percentile ("below average"
workers) and those at the 84th percentile ("superior" workers) is twice that: $32,000 per year.
Such differences are large enough to be important to the economic health of an organization.

         Employee output can also be measured as a percentage of mean output; that is, each
employee's output is divided by the output of workers at the 50th percentile and then multiplied
by 100. Research shows that the standard deviation of output as a percentage of average output
(called !) varies by job level. For unskilled and semi-skilled jobs, the average ! figure is
19%. For skilled work, it is 32%, and for managerial and professional jobs, it is 48% (Hunter et
al., 1990). These figures are averages based on all available studies that measured or counted the
amount of output for different employees. If a superior worker is defined as one whose
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods                                                           8

performance (output) is at the 84th percentile (that is, 1 SD above the mean), then a superior

worker in a lower level job produces 19% more output than an average worker, a superior skilled

worker produces 32% more output than the average skilled worker, and a superior manager or

professional produces output 48% above the average for those jobs. These differences are

substantial and they indicate that the payoff from using valid hiring methods to predict later job

performance is quite large.

Another determinant of the practical value of selection methods is the selection ratio--the

proportion of applicants who are hired. At one extreme, if an organization must hire all who

apply for the job, no hiring procedure has any practical value. At the other extreme, if the

organization has the luxury of hiring only the top scoring 1%, the practical value of gains from

selection per person hired will be extremely large. But few organizations can afford to reject

99% of all job applicants. Actual selection ratios are typically in the .30 to .70 range, a range that

still produces substantial practical utility.

The formula for computing practical gains per person hired per year on the job is a three-

way product (Brogden, 1949; Schmidt et al., 1979):

                             // = !"!!

(when performance is measured in dollar value)      (1)

                             // = !"!!

(when performance is measured in percentage of average output) (2)

In these equations, !" is the difference between the validity of the new (more valid) selection

procedure and the old selection procedure. (Both the new and the old selection procedures can be

composites of scores on several selection methods.) If the old selection method has no validity

(that is, selection is random), then !" is the same as the validity of the new procedure; that is,
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  9

!" = !". Hence, relative to random selection, practical value (utility) is directly proportional
to validity. If the old procedure has some validity, then the utility gain is directly proportional to
!". The term ! is the average score on the employment procedure of those hired (in z -score
form), as compared to the general applicant pool. The smaller the selection ratio, the higher this
value will be. The first equation expresses selection utility in dollars. For example, a typical final
figure for a medium complexity job might be $18,000, meaning that increasing the validity of the
hiring methods leads to an average increase in output per hire of $18,000 per year. To get the full
value, one must of course multiply by the number of workers hired. If 100 are hired, then the
increase would be (100)($18,000) = $1,800,000. Finally, one must consider the number of years
these workers remain on the job, because the $18,000 per worker is realized each year that
worker remains on the job. Of all these factors that affect the practical value, only validity is a
characteristic of the personnel measure itself.

         The second equation expresses the practical value in percentage of increase in output. For
example, a typical figure is 9%, meaning that workers hired with the improved selection method
will have on average 9% higher output. A 9% increase in labor productivity would typically be
very important economically for the firm, and might make the difference between success and
bankruptcy.

         What we have presented here is not, of course, a comprehensive discussion of selection
utility. Readers who would like more detail are referred to the research articles cited above and
to Boudreau (1983a, 1983b, 1984), Cascio and Silbey (1979), Cronshaw and Alexander (1985),
Hunter, Schmidt, and Coggin (1988), Hunter and Schmidt (1982, 1983), Schmidt and Hunter
(1983), Schmidt, Hunter, Outerbridge, and Trattner (1986), Schmidt, Hunter, and Pearlman
(1982), and Schmidt et al. (1984). Our purpose here is to make three important points: (a) the
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  10

economic value of gains from improved hiring methods are typically quite large, (b) these gains
are directly proportional to the size of the increase in validity when moving from the old to the
new selection procedures, and (c) no other characteristic of a personnel measure is as important
as predictive validity. If one looks at the two equations above, one sees that practical value per
person hired is a three-way product. One of the three elements in that three-way product is
predictive validity. The other two--! or ! and !--are equally important, but they are
characteristics of the job or the situation, not of the personnel measure.

          Validity of Personnel Assessment Methods: 100 Years of Research Findings
         Research studies assessing the ability of personnel assessment methods to predict future
job performance and future learning (e.g., in training programs) have been conducted since the
first decade of the 20th century. However, as early as the 1920s it became apparent that different
studies conducted on the same assessment procedure did not appear to agree in their results.
Validity estimates for the same method and same job were quite different for different studies.
During the 1930s and 1940s the belief developed that this state of affairs resulted from subtle
differences between jobs that were difficult or impossible for job analysts and job analysis
methodology to detect. That is, researchers concluded that the validity of a given procedure
really was different in different settings for what appeared to be basically the same job, and that
the conflicting findings in validity studies were just reflecting this fact of reality.
         This belief, called the theory of situational specificity of validity, remained dominant in
personnel psychology until the late 1970s when it was discovered that most of the differences
across studies were due to statistical and measurement artifacts and not to real differences in the
jobs (Schmidt & Hunter, 1977; Schmidt, Hunter, Pearlman, & Shane, 1979). The largest of these
artifacts was simple sampling error variation, caused by the use of small samples in the studies.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  11

(The number of employees per study was usually in the 40­70 range.) This realization led to the
development of quantitative techniques collectively called meta-analysis that could combine
validity estimates across studies and correct for the effects of these statistical and measurement
artifacts (Hunter & Schmidt, 1990; 2004; Hunter, Schmidt, & Jackson, 1982; Schmidt & Hunter,
2015). Studies based on meta-analysis provided more accurate estimates of the average
operational validity and showed that the level of real variability of validities was usually quite
small and might in fact be zero (Schmidt, 1992; Schmidt et al., 1993). In addition, the findings
indicated that the variability of validity was not only small or zero across settings for the same
type of job, but was also small across different kinds of jobs of similar complexity (Hunter,
1980; Schmidt, Hunter, & Pearlman, 1981). These findings made it possible to select the most
valid personnel measures for any job. They also made it possible to compare the validity of
different personnel measures for jobs in general, as we do in this paper.

         Table 1 summarizes research findings for the prediction of performance on the job. The
third column in Table 1 shows the estimated mean validity of 31 selection methods for predicting
performance on the job, as revealed by meta-analyses. Performance on the job was typically
measured using supervisory ratings of job performance, but production records, sales records,
and other measures were also used. The sources and other information about these validity
figures are given in the notes to Table 1.

                                         [Insert Table 1 about here]
         Many of the selection methods in Table 1 also predict job-related learning; that is, the
acquisition of job knowledge with experience on the job, and the amount learned in training and
development programs. However, the overall amount of research on the prediction of learning is
less. For many of the procedures in Table 1, there is little research evidence on their ability to
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  12

predict future job-related learning. Table 2 summarizes available research findings for the
prediction of performance in training programs. The third column in Table 2 shows the mean
validity of 16 selection methods as revealed by available meta-analyses. In the vast majority of
the studies included in these meta-analyses, performance in training was assessed using objective
measures of amount learned on the job; trainer ratings of amount learned were used in about 5%
of the studies.

                                         [Insert Table 2 about here]
         Unless otherwise noted in Tables 1 and 2, all validity estimates in Tables 1 and 2 are
corrected for the downward bias due to measurement error in the measures of job performance
and for range restriction on the selection method in incumbent samples relative to applicant
populations. No correction is made for measurement error in the predictor scores, because
observed scores must be used in selection; true scores are unknown and cannot be used.
Observed validity estimates corrected in this manner estimate operational validities of selection
methods when used to hire from applicant pools. Operational validities are also referred to as
true validities. In both tables selection methods are presented in the order of their incremental
validity over that of GMA rather than in the order of their zero order operational validity. In both
tables they are numbered from low to high on this dimension and the procedures in Table 1 are
discussed in this order.
1. General Mental Ability (GMA)
         In the pantheon of 31 personnel measures in Table 1, GMA (also called general cognitive
ability and general intelligence) occupies a special place, for several reasons. First, it has the
highest validity and lowest application cost. Second, the research evidence for the validity of
GMA measures for predicting job performance is stronger than that for any other method
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  13

(Hunter, 1986; Hunter & Schmidt, 1996; Ree & Earles, 1992; Schmidt, 2002; Schmidt & Hunter,
1981; Schmidt et al., 2008). Literally thousands of studies of the validity of GMA have been
conducted over the last 100 years. By contrast, fewer studies (often far fewer studies) have been
conducted on the validity of other selection methods. Third, GMA has been shown to be the best
available predictor of job-related learning. It is the best predictor of acquisition of job knowledge
on the job (Schmidt & Hunter, 1992; Schmidt, Hunter, & Outerbridge, 1986) and of performance
(learning) in job training programs (Hunter, 1986; Hunter & Hunter, 1984; Ree & Earles, 1992;
Schmidt et al., 2008). Fourth, the theoretical foundation for GMA is stronger than for any other
personnel measure. Theories of intelligence have been developed and tested by psychologists for
around 100 years (Brody, 1992; Carroll, 1993; Jensen, 1998). As a result of this massive research
literature, the meaning of the construct of intelligence is much clearer than, for example, the
meaning of what is measured by other selection procedures such as interviews, situational
judgment tests, "emotional intelligence" measures, person-job fit measures, person-organization
fit measures, or assessment centers (Arthur & Villado, 2008; Brody, 1992; Hunter, 1986; Jensen,
1998).

         The value of .65 in Table 1 for the validity of GMA is the average of eight meta-analytic
estimates as presented in Schmidt et al. (2008). Based on the data from a large meta-analytic
study conducted for the U.S. Department of Labor (Hunter, 1980; Hunter & Hunter, 1984),
Hunter et al. (2006), after applying the new range correction procedure, found that GMA validity
ranged from .74 for professional and managerial jobs down to .39 for unskilled jobs. The mean
validity for medium complexity jobs (62% of all jobs in the U.S.) was .66. When Schmidt et al.
(2008) averaged this value with seven other meta-analytic values the overall average was the .65
seen in Table 1. The medium complexity category includes skilled blue collar jobs and mid-level
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  14

white collar jobs, such as upper level clerical and mid to lower level administrative and
managerial jobs. Hence, the conclusions in this article apply mainly to the middle 62% of jobs in
the U.S. economy in terms of complexity. This figure of .65 produces a high level of practical
utility; it produces 65% of the gain in job performance that would be realized with perfectly
accurate selection.

         As noted above, GMA is also an excellent predictor of job-related learning. It has been
found to have high and essentially equal predictive validity for performance (amount learned) in
job training programs for jobs at all job levels studied. The average validity value across eight
meta-analyses in Schmidt et al. (2008) is .67. This is the figure entered in Table 2. [This is also
the average value found in the U.S. Department of Labor research (Hunter et al., 2006).]
Thus, when an employer uses GMA to select employees who will have a high level of
performance on the job, that employer is also selecting those who will learn the most from job
training programs and will acquire job knowledge faster from experience on the job. In fact,
most selection procedures shown to be valid for training performance are also valid for
predicting job performance, as can be seen by comparing Table 2 to Table 1. Examples include
integrity tests, conscientiousness tests, and employment interviews.

         Because of its special status, GMA can be considered the primary personnel measure for
hiring decisions, and we can consider the remaining 30 personnel measures as supplements to
GMA measures. That is, in the case of each of the other measures, one can ask the following
question: When used in a properly weighted combination with a GMA measure, how much will
each of these measures increase predictive validity for job performance over the .65 that can be
obtained by using only GMA? This "incremental validity" translates into incremental utility, that
is, into increases in practical value. Because validity is directly proportional to utility, the
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  15

percentage increase in validity produced by adding the second measure is also the percentage of
increase in practical value (utility). In Tables 1 and 2 selection measures are presented not in the
order of their zero order operational validity, but in the order of their incremental contribution to
prediction. It will become apparent that many hiring procedures currently receiving a lot of
attention in business and other organizations make little or no contribution to predictive validity
over that of GMA. In addition, many of these hiring procedures also have low zero order
validity.

         The increase in validity (and utility) depends not only on the validity of the measure
added to GMA, but also on the correlation between the two measures. The smaller this
correlation is, the larger is the increase in overall validity. The figures for incremental validity in
Table 1 are affected by these correlations. The correlations between mental ability measures and
the other measures were estimated from the research literature (often from meta-analyses); the
sources of these estimates are given in the notes to Tables 1 and 2. To accurately represent the
observed score correlations between predictors in applicant populations, we corrected all
correlations between GMA and other predictors for indirect range restriction but not for
measurement error in the measure of either predictor.
2. Integrity Tests

         Consider integrity tests. These tests are used in business and industry to hire employees
with reduced probability of counterproductive work behaviors on the job, such as fighting,
drinking or taking drugs, stealing from the employer, equipment sabotage, or excessive
absenteeism. Integrity tests do predict these behaviors, but surprisingly they also predict overall
job performance (Ones, Viswesvaran, & Schmidt, 1993). The zero order operational validity for
job performance is .46. As seen in Table 1, adding an integrity test to the GMA test produces a
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  16

.13 increment in validity, a 20% increase in validity and therefore in practical utility. Validity
increases from .65 to .78. This largest of incremental of validities is due in significant part to the
fact that integrity tests correlate nearly zero with GMA.

         A meta-analysis based on 8 studies and 2,364 individuals estimated the mean validity of
integrity tests for predicting performance in training programs at .43 (Schmidt, Ones, &
Viswesvaran, 1994). As can be seen in Table 2, the incremental validity for integrity tests for
predicting training performance is .11, which yields a 16% increase in validity and utility over
that produced by GMA alone. In the prediction of training performance, integrity tests appear to
produce higher incremental validity than any other measure studied to date. Integrity tests have
been found to measure, in part, the personality traits of Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, and
Emotional Stability (Ones, 1993). More recent research has shown that integrity tests also
measure in part the construct of honesty-humility (Marcus, Lee, & Ashton, 2007). This scale
measures tendencies towards being sincere, modest, fair, and honest.
3, 4, & 6. Employment Interviews

         Employment interviews can be either structured or unstructured (Huffcutt, Roth, &
McDaniel, 1996; McDaniel et al., 1994). Unstructured interviews have no fixed format or set of
questions to be answered. In fact, the same interviewer often asks different applicants different
questions. Nor is there a fixed procedure for scoring responses; in fact, responses to individual
questions are usually not scored, and only an overall evaluation (or rating) is given to each
applicant, based on summary impressions and judgments. Structured interviews are exactly the
opposite on all counts. In addition, the questions to be asked are usually determined by a careful
analysis of the job in question and cannot be deviated from by the interviewer. Structured
interviews are more costly to construct and use. Survey results indicate that many employment
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  17

interviewers (typically managers) object to having to use structured job interviews because of the
restrictions they place on the way they conduct their interviews (Schmidt & Zimmerman, 2004).

         Until recently, the available meta-analytic data indicated that the unstructured interview
was less valid than the structured interview. Application of the new, more accurate method of
correcting for range restriction changed that conclusion (Oh, Postlethwaite, & Schmidt, 2013).
As shown in Table 1, the average operational validity of the structured and unstructured
interviews is equal at .58. With the former less accurate procedure for correcting for range
restriction the validity estimates were .51 for the structured interview and .38 for the unstructured
interview. The new figures represent a substantial change, so some explanation is appropriate.
The more accurate correction for range restriction requires an estimate of the reliability of the
predictor. (See Hunter et al., 2006, for details.) For interviews, the appropriate reliability is
estimated as the average correlation between different interviewers interviewing the same group
of applicants on different occasions (different days). This form of reliability controls for all three
relevant types of measurement error in interviews (Schmidt & Hunter, 2015, pp. 115­121). Two
different studies have provided meta-analytic estimates of this reliability for unstructured
interviews. Conway, Jako, and Goodman (1995) reported an average reliability of .37, and
Huffcutt, Culbertson, and Weyhrauch (2013) obtained an average value of .40. The mean values
obtained in these studies are relatively low, causing the range restriction correction to be
relatively large. If subsequent meta-analytic estimates of reliability for unstructured interviews
are larger, then the estimate of operational validity for the unstructured interview will be lower.
[McDaniel et al. (1994) reported higher interview reliabilities but those reliability estimates did
not control of all three types of measurement error in interview scores and thus were inflated.]

         Although zero order operational validity is about equal for the two types of employment
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  18

interviews, the structured interview produces a larger incremental validity--an 18% increase
versus a 13% increase for unstructured interviews. This occurs because unstructured interviews
have a higher correlation with GMA. As shown in Table 2, unstructured interviews have higher
validity than structured interviews for predicting performance in job training programs and also
have higher incremental validity (.070 vs. .034). Both these are surprising findings. But the
broader conclusion is that employment interviews do predict training performance and do
contribute to prediction over and above the validity of GMA measures. Neither of these facts is
widely known.

         Next, consider phone-administered interviews (6 in Table 1). This is a non-traditional
type of structured employment interview in which the questions and keyed answers are
developed empirically by comparing the responses of high and low performing employees on the
job in question. The interview is conducted by telephone and recorded, with the answers later
scored based on the taped transcript. A major advantage of this type of interview is lower costs
stemming from the ability to interview geographically scattered applicants, thus saving travel
costs. The zero order validity of this interview type is somewhat lower than that for traditional
employment interviews but the incremental validity is substantial (.057), producing a 9%
increase in validity. This interview type has not been evaluated for its ability to predict training
program performance and so does not appear in Table 2.
5. Interests

         Earlier research (e.g., Hunter & Hunter, 1984) indicated low validity (.10) for interests in
predicting job performance. In the earlier studies these meta-analyses were based on, no attempt
was made to match the type of interest measure with the type of job. For example, Realistic
interests (in the Holland RIASEC interest model) are relevant to the job of mechanic. The other 5
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  19

interest types and their scales are irrelevant to, and inappropriate for use with, the job of
mechanic. But in the earlier research the validity of all 6 RIASEC scales was assessed against
performance in every kind of job, and as a result mean validities were very low. The validity
information for interests reported here is for vocation-focused interest scales that have been
matched to the dominant interest classification of job in question. For example, in the case of the
mechanics job, only the validity of the Realistic interest scale is included. Other interest scales,
such as the Social scale, are not paired with the mechanics job or any of the other jobs classified
as Realistic in nature (i.e., as drawing on Realistic interests).

         Given this sort of appropriate matching of interest scale to job type, interest measures
show an average operational validity of .31 for job performance and produce an incremental
validity of .062, or 10%. In Table 2, it can be seen that the situation is similar for the prediction
of training program success: an operation validity of .34 and an incremental validity of .070, a
validity increase of 11%. Clearly, earlier research created a misleading picture of the potential of
interest measures to predict both job performance and amount learned in training programs.

         The incremental validity presented in Table 1 is an average across all six RIASEC
interest scales. The incremental validity actually varies somewhat across these scales. The
incremental validities for the individual scales are provided in note e to Table 1. The reason for
the variation in incremental validities is that some interest scales correlate higher with GMA
(e.g., Investigative, with r = .25) and others correlate lower with GMA (e.g., Artistic, with r = -
.02). These correlations are also provided in note e.
7. Conscientiousness Measures

         The figures for the prediction of job performance from conscientiousness measures are
given in Table 1. The validity of conscientiousness measures is substantially lower than that for
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  20

integrity tests (.22 vs. .46), its increment to validity is smaller (.053), as is its percentage of
increase in validity (8%). However, these values for conscientiousness are still large enough to
be practically useful. Turning to Table 2, it can be seen that the validity of conscientiousness for
predicting performance in job training programs is .25, producing an incremental validity
contribution of .06, a 9% increase in validity. As indicated in the table notes, validity values for
all the Big Five personality traits are from the Schmidt et al. (2008) multiple meta-analytic
estimates. These values are for standard self-report personality measures.
8. Reference Checks

         For the next procedure, reference checks, the incremental validity is 8%, the same value
as for Conscientiousness measures. However, the information presented in Table 1 may not at
present be fully accurate. The validity studies on which the validity of .26 in Table 1 is based
were conducted prior to the development of the current legal climate in the United States.
Starting during the 1970s and 1980s, employers providing negative information about past job
performance or behavior on the job to prospective new employers were sometimes subjected to
lawsuits by the former employees in question. Today, in the United States at least, many
previous employers will provide only information on the dates of employment and the job titles
the former employee held. Past employers typically refuse to release information on quality or
quantity of job performance, disciplinary record of the past employee, or whether the former
employee quit voluntarily or was dismissed. This is especially likely to be the case if the
information is requested in writing; occasionally, such information will be revealed by telephone
or in face to face conversation but one cannot be certain that this will occur.

         The legal climate in the United States has changed over the past decades and by the turn
of the millennium, 36 states had enacted laws that grant employers immunity from legal liability
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  21

for providing good faith job references. Given these changes, one might think that reference
checks may again come to provide an increment to the validity of a GMA measure for predicting
job performance. In practice, however, reference immunity laws have not had major effects.
Employers are still reluctant to provide more than dates of employment and job titles (Cooper,
2001, p. 14).

         Older research indicates that reference checks predict performance in training with a
mean validity of .23 (Hunter & Hunter, 1984, Table 8), yielding a 6% increment in validity over
GMA tests, as shown in Table 2. But, again, these findings may no longer hold; it seems unlikely
that changes in the legal climate will make these validity estimates accurate again.
9. Openness to Experience Measures

         Measures of the personality trait of Openness to Experience have very low zero order
validity (.04) but nevertheless produces an increase in overall validity of 6%. This occurs
because Openness to Experience functions as a suppressor variable, as can be seen from its
negative regression weight in Table 1. Use of that negative regression weight is required for
attainment of the listed incremental validity. Despite the 6% incremental validity produced by
the suppressor effect, most employers would probably be reluctant to use a predictor with a zero
order operational validity as low as .04. Employers would also probably be reluctant to employ
the negative regression weight. The operation and function of suppressor variables is explained
in detail in Collins and Schmidt (1997). As can be seen in Table 2, Openness to Experience has
no incremental validity for prediction of training performance, despite the fact that its zero order
operational validity (.24) is higher than it is for predicting job performance (.04). Among the Big
Five personality traits, Openness to Experience has the largest correlation with GMA (.38),
which limits its incremental validity. (These correlations are provided in note g to Table 1.)
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  22

10. Biographical Data Measures (Biodata)
         Next in Table 1 is biographical data measures, usually referred to as biodata.

Biographical data measures contain questions about past life experiences, such as early life
experiences in one's family, in high school, and in hobbies and other pursuits. For example, there
may be questions on offices held in student organizations, on sports one participated in, and on
disciplinary practices of one's parents. Each question has been chosen for inclusion in the
measure because in the initial developmental sample it correlated with a criterion of job
performance, performance in training, or some other criterion (e.g., promotion rate). That is,
biographical data measures are empirically developed. However, they are usually not completely
actuarial, because some hypotheses are invoked in choosing the beginning set of items. However,
choice of the final questions to retain for the scale is mostly actuarial. Today antidiscrimination
laws prevent certain questions from being used, such as sex, marital status, and age, and such
items are not included. Biographical data measures have been used to predict performance on a
wide variety of jobs, ranging in level from blue collar unskilled jobs to scientific and managerial
jobs. These measures are also used to predict job tenure (turnover) and absenteeism (cf. Schmidt
& Hoffman, 1973), but we do not consider these usages in this article.

         Table 1 shows that biographical data measures have substantial zero-order validity (.35)
for predicting job performance and produce an increment in validity over GMA of .036 on
average (a 6% increase). The reason that the increment in validity is not larger is that
biographical data correlates substantially with GMA (Schmidt, 1988). This suggests that in
addition to whatever other traits they measure, biographical data measures are also in part
indirect reflections of mental ability. As shown in Table 2, biographical data measures predict
performance in training programs with a mean validity of .30 and increment overall validity by
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  23

.07, an 11% increase. In the prediction of both job performance and training performance,
biographical data measures function as suppressor variables, as can be seen from their negative
regression weights. Attainment of the incremental validities shown in the tables requires use of
these negative regression weights.

         Biographical data measures are technically difficult and time consuming to construct
(although they are easy to use once constructed). Considerable statistical sophistication and large
data sets are required to develop them. However, some commercial firms offer validated
biographical data measures for particular jobs (e.g., first line supervisors, managers, clerical
workers, and law enforcement personnel). These firms maintain control of the proprietary
scoring keys and the scoring of applicant responses.
11. Job Experience (Years)

         Job experience as indexed in Tables 1 and 2 refers to the number of years of previous
experience on the same or similar job; it conveys no information on past performance on the job.
In the data used to derive the validity estimates in these tables, job experience varied widely:
from less than 6 months to more than 30 years. Under these circumstances, the validity of job
experience for predicting future job performance is only .16 and the increment in validity (and
utility) over that from GMA alone is only .032 (a 5% increase). However, Schmidt, Hunter, and
Outerbridge (1986) found that in groups in which experience on the job does not exceed 5 years,
the correlation between amount of job experience and job performance is considerably larger: .33
when job performance is measured by supervisory ratings, and .47 when job performance is
measured using a work sample test. These researchers found that the relation is nonlinear: Up to
about 5 years of job experience, job performance increases linearly with increasing experience
on the job. After that, the curve becomes increasingly horizontal, and further increases in job
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  24

experience produce little increase in job performance. Apparently, during the first 5 years on
these (mid-level, medium complexity) jobs, employees were continually acquiring additional job
knowledge and skills that improved their job performance. But by the end of 5 years this process
was nearly complete, and further increases in job experience led to little increase in job
knowledge and skills (Schmidt & Hunter, 1992). These findings suggest that even under ideal
circumstances, job experience at the start of median complexity jobs will predict job
performance only for the first 5 years on the job. (This period may be longer for professional,
scientific, and high level managerial jobs, but this has not been studied.) By contrast, GMA
continues to predict job performance indefinitely (Hunter & Schmidt, 1996; Schmidt, Hunter,
Outerbridge, & Goff, 1988; Schmidt, Hunter, Outerbridge, & Trattner, 1986).

         As shown in Table 2, the amount of job experience does not predict performance in
training programs teaching new skills. However, one can note from this finding that job
experience does not retard the acquisition of new job skills in training programs as might have
been predicted from theories of proactive inhibition.
12 & 22. "Emotional Intelligence" Measures

         In the last several decades, "emotional intelligence" measures have become popular in
many businesses, and emotional intelligence has been treated in the popular press as an actual
psychological trait or construct. We have placed the label emotional intelligence in quotation
marks because most psychologists, including personnel psychologists, do not accept that
emotional intelligence is a trait or construct; rather they view emotional intelligence measures as
arbitrary amalgamations of items measuring long established psychological traits (cf. Murphy,
2006; Matthews, Zeidner, & Roberts, 2002). There are of two types of emotional intelligence
measures: personality-based measures (12 in Table 1) and ability based measures (Mayer,
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  25

Salovey, Caruso, & Sitarenios, 2003; 22 in Table 1). The questions on ability based measures
have answers viewed as correct and these measures are correlated about .45 with GMA when
corrected for indirect range restriction (Joseph & Newman, 2010). Hence, they are indicators of
GMA, just as verbal and quantitative ability tests are (cf. Schmidt, 2011). Personality-based
measures are made up mostly of personality type questions with some other types on non-
cognitive measures being included. The zero order validity of personality-based EI measures is
.32, with incremental validity of .029, a 5% increase. Ability-based EI measures have an average
zero order validity of .23, with basically no incremental validity.

         Both the validity and the incremental validity are lower than assumed by advocates of
these measures. Emotional intelligence measures have not been studied in the prediction of
training performance and so do not appear in Table 2.
13. Person-Organization Fit Measures

         Person-Organization Fit measures assess the degree of match between characteristics of
the applicants (such as values, goals, desires, and interests) and the values, purposes, and goals of
the organization as a whole. These measured do not include any cognitive, ability, or skills
component. Measures of Person-Organization Fit have recently become popular in business and
industry. For the prediction of job performance they have a low average validity (.13) and
produce an incremental validity increase of only 4%. Both these figures are disappointing to the
advocates of these measures. Person-organization fit measures have not been studied in relation
to performance in job training programs and so do not appear in Table 2.
14. Knowledge-Based Situational Judgment Tests

         Next we have knowledge-based Situational Judgment Tests. These measures present the
applicant with complex situational workplace problems, often involving human interactions, with
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  26

the applicant being required to select the best solution from those listed. These measures have an
average validity of .26. However, because they correlate nearly .60 with GMA, their incremental
validity is only 2% (.015). Note that these measures function as suppressor variables, with a
regression weight of -.17. Attainment of the small incremental validity that they produce requires
use of this negative regression weight. No meta-analyses relating these measures to training
performance have been conducted, so there is no entry for them in Table 2.
15. Person-Job Fit Measures

         The next predictor is Person-Job Fit measures. These measures assess the degree of
match between characteristics of the applicants (such as values, desires, and interests) and those
embodied in, or offered by, the job the applicant is applying for. They do not include matching
on applicant GMA and job GMA requirements. The process of constructing these fit measures
for each job can be time consuming and costly. These measures have an average validity of .18
and produce only a 2% increment in validity over that of GMA. Both the zero order operational
validity and the incremental validity are lower than had been anticipated by those researching
these measures. No studies have been conducted on the validity of Person-Job Fit measures for
predicting training performance and so they do not appear in Table 2.
16. Assessment Centers

         Assessment centers are expensive to use. Individuals who are administered assessment
centers spend one to several days at a central location where they are observed participating in
such exercises as leaderless group discussions, business games, and in-basket exercises. Various
ability and personality tests are usually administered, and in-depth structured interviews are also
part of most assessment centers. The average assessment center includes seven exercises or
assessments and lasts 2 days (Gaugler, Rosenthal, Thornton, & Benson, 1987). Assessment
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  27

centers are used for jobs ranging from first line supervisors to high level management positions.
The observers who record and score the performance of the candidates are personnel
psychologists or manager trained in the observer role by personnel psychologists.

         Assessment centers are like biographical data measures: They have substantial validity
(.36) but little incremental validity over GMA (.01, a 2% increase) in predicting job
performance. The reason is also the same: They correlate highly with GMA--in part because
they typically include a measure of GMA (Gaugler et al., 1987; Collins et al., 2003). Assessment
center scores function as suppressor variables when used with GMA. Despite the fact of
relatively low incremental validity, many organizations use assessment centers for managerial
jobs because they believe assessment centers provide them with a wide range of insights about
candidates and their developmental possibilities. As can be seen in Table 2, assessment centers
show a similar level of validity for the prediction of performance in job training programs: .37,
with an incremental validity of 2%.
17. The Training and Experience Point Method

         The point method of evaluating previous training and experience (T & E) is used mostly
in government hiring at all levels--federal, state, and local. A major reason for its widespread
use is that point method procedures are relatively inexpensive to construct and use. The point
method appears under a wide variety of different names (McDaniel et al., 1988), but all such
procedures have several important characteristics in common. All point method procedures are
credentialistic; typically, an applicant receives a fixed number of points for (a) each year or
month of experience on the same or similar job, (b) each year of schooling or each course taken
that appears to be face-relevant, and (c) each relevant training program completed, and so on.
There is usually no attempt to evaluate past achievements, accomplishments, or job performance;
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  28

in effect, the procedure assumes that achievement and performance are determined solely by the
exposures that the method measures. As shown in Table 1, the T & E point method has low
validity (.11) and produces only a 1% increase in validity over that available from GMA alone.
The T & E point method has not been used to predict performance in training programs and so
does not appear in Table 2.
18. Grade Point Average

         The validity value for grade point average (GPA) in Table 1 is for college and graduate
level grade point averages. No estimates are available for high school grade point average, which
may have validity higher than the .34 in Table 1. Apparently most of the validity of GPA is
captured by GMA, because the incremental validity of GPA is negligible (less than .01). GPA
has not been studied in relation to training performance, where its validity might be expected to
be higher than the .34 for job performance, because of the strong resemblance between training
programs and classroom demands.
19. Years of Education

         Sheer amount of education has even lower validity for predicting job performance than
the T & E point method (.10). Its increment to validity is the same 1% as obtained with the T &
E point method. It is important to note that this finding does not imply that education is irrelevant
to occupational success; education is clearly an important determinant of the level of job the
individual can obtain. What this finding shows is that among those who apply to get a particular
job, years of education does not predict future performance on that job very well. For example,
for a typical blue collar job, years of education among applicants might range from 9 to 12. The
validity of .10 then means that the average job performance of those with 12 years of education
will be only very slightly higher (on average) than that for those with 9 or 10 years.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  29

         As can be seen in Table 2, amount of education predicts learning in job training programs
better than it predicts performance on the job. Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 6) found a mean
validity of .20 for performance in training programs. This is not a high level of validity, but it is
twice as large as the validity for predicting job performance. Its incremental validity is .03 (a 4%
increase).
20. Extraversion

         As can be seen in Table 1, measures of the personality trait of Extroversion have low
validity for predicting job performance (.09) and close to no incremental validity. These
measures perform somewhat better in the prediction of training performance (.17), with an
incremental validity of .02 (3%). Refer to note g in Table 1 for additional information.
21. Peer Ratings

         Peer ratings are evaluations of performance or potential made by one's co-workers; they
typically are averaged across peer raters to increase the reliability (and hence validity) of the
ratings. Peer ratings have the limitation that they cannot be used for evaluating and hiring
applicants from outside the organization; they can be used only for internal job assignment,
promotion, or training assignment. They have been used extensively for these internal personnel
decisions in the military (particularly the U.S. and Israeli militaries) and some private firms, such
as insurance companies. One concern associated with peer ratings is that they will be influenced
by friendship, or social popularity, or both. Another is that pairs or clusters of peers might
secretly agree in advance to give each other high peer ratings. However, the research that has
been done does not support these fears; for example, partialling friendship measures out of the
peer ratings does not appear to affect the validity of the ratings (cf. Hollander, 1956; Waters &
Waters, 1970).
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  30

         As shown in Table 1, despite having a relatively high zero order operational validity
(.49), peer ratings produce only a 1% increase in validity over that of GMA in the prediction of
job performance. This occurs because peer ratings correlate highly with GMA (nearly .60). As
seen in Table 2, validity for training performance is .36 but incremental validity is only 1%,
again due to the high correlation with GMA. Peer ratings are the last predictor in Table 1 with
incremental validity or 1% or larger. The remainder are at less than 1%. This includes some that
are widely used and highly regarded.
22. Next is Ability-Based measures of "emotional intelligence". The discussion of these
measures is presented along with that of Personality-Based EI measures (12, above). Ability-
Based EI measures have a mean operational validity of .23 and produce no incremental validity.
The validity of these measures for the prediction of learning in job training programs has not
been studied, and so there is no entry for them in Table 2.
23 & 26. Measures of Agreeableness and Emotional Stability

         Next, consider measures of the Big Five personality traits of Agreeableness and
Emotional Stability. In Table 1 we can see that both these trait measures have low validity for
predicting job performance and no incremental validity. In Table 2, it can be seen that their
validities are also low for training performance, and incremental validity is zero for Emotional
Stability and only 1% for Agreeableness. The reader should keep in mind that these values are
for standard self-report measures; personality traits measured using ratings by others who know
the individual (e.g., coworkers) tend to have higher validities (Oh, Wang, & Mount, 2011).
However, such measures are rarely used in job selection at present because such ratings are
difficult to obtain. It is also the case that validities are somewhat higher when the questions
asked are made work-specific; that is, they ask how the respondent behaves or reacts at work or
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  31

on the job, rather than in general (Shaffer & Postlethwaite, 2012, Table 1). This approach to
increasing validity is not difficult to implement. Refer to note g in Table 1 for additional
information.
24. Work Sample Tests

         Next, consider work sample tests. Work sample tests are hands-on simulations of part or
all of the job that must be performed by applicants. For example, as part of a work sample test,
an applicant might be required to repair a series of defective electric motors or computers. Work
sample tests are often used to hire skilled workers, such as welders, machinists, and carpenters.
These tests can be used only with applicants who already know the job or occupation. Such
workers do not need to be trained, and so the ability of work sample tests to predict training
performance has not been studied. Hence, there is no entry for work sample tests in Table 2.

         In the earlier Schmidt and Hunter (1998) article, the average validity of work sample tests
for predicting job performance was reported as .54, based on the meta-analysis of Hunter and
Hunter (1984). At that time there were only seven primary studies available to be included in
their meta-analysis. Since 1984 many more studies have been conducted; these studies were
added to the earlier studies and meta-analyzed by Roth, Bobko, and McFarland (2005),
producing the mean validity of .33 presented in Table 1. Roth et al. (2005) attributed the
decrease in the estimated validity of work sample tests produced by the newer studies to
increased use of work sample tests in the service sector of the economy. It is possible that the
original validity estimate of .54 is still applicable to traditional manual skilled trades such as
machinist, carpenter, welders, and the like.

         It appears that almost all of the validity of work sample tests is captured by GMA
measures, because the incremental validity is essentially zero. This case, like that of unstructured
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  32

interviews (discussed earlier), is an example of the fact that in science new research can change
results and estimates.
25. Situational Judgment Tests (Behavioral Tendency). Refer to 12, above.
26. Emotional Stability measures. Refer to 23, above.
27. Graphology

         Graphology is the analysis of handwriting. Graphologists claim that people express their
personalities through their handwriting and that one's handwriting therefore reveals personality
traits and tendencies that graphologists can use to predict future job performance. Graphology is
used infrequently in the United States and Canada but is widely used in hiring in France (Steiner,
1997; Steiner & Gilliland, 1996), although not in most other European countries (Bangerter,
Konig, Blatti, & Salvisberg (2009). Levy (1979) reported that 85% of French firms routinely use
graphology in hiring of personnel. Ben-Shakhar, Bar-Hillel, Bilu, Ben-Abba, and Flug (1986)
stated that in Israel graphology is used more widely than any other single personality measure.

         Several studies have examined the ability of graphologists and nongraphologists to
predict job performance from handwriting samples (Jansen, 1973; Rafaeli & Klimoski, 1983; see
also Ben-Shakhar, 1989; Ben-Shakhar, Bar-Hillel, Bilu, et al., 1986; Ben-Shakhar, Bar-Hillel, &
Flug, 1986). The key findings in this area are as follows. When the assessees who provide
handwriting samples are allowed to write on any subject they choose, both graphologists and
untrained non-graphologists can infer some (limited) information about their personalities and
job performance from the handwriting samples. But untrained non-graphologists do just as well
as graphologists; both show validities in the .18­.20 range. When the assesses are required to
copy the same material from a book to create their handwriting sample, the evidence indicates
that neither graphologists nor non-graphologists can infer any valid information about
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  33

personality traits or job performance from the handwriting samples (Neter & Ben-Shakhar,
1989).

         What these findings indicate is that, contrary to graphology theory, whatever limited
information about personality or job performance there is in the handwriting samples comes
from the content and not the characteristics of the handwriting. For example, writers differ in
style of writing, range of vocabulary, expression of emotions, verbal fluency, grammatical skills,
and general knowledge. Whatever information about personality and ability these differences
contain, the training of graphologists does not allow them to extract it better than can people
untrained in graphology. In handwriting per se, independent of content, there appears to be no
information about personality or job performance (Neter & Ben-Shakhar, 1989).

         To many people, this is a counterintuitive finding. To these people, it seems obvious that
the wide and dramatic variations in handwriting that everyone observes must reveal personality
differences among individuals. Actually, most of the variation in handwriting is due to
differences among individuals in fine motor coordination of finger muscles. And these
differences in finger muscles and their coordination are probably due mostly to random genetic
variations among individuals. The genetic variations that cause these finger coordination
differences do not appear to be linked to personality; and in fact there is no apparent reason to
believe they should be.

         The validity of graphology for predicting performance in training programs has not been
studied. However, the findings with respect to performance on the job make it highly unlikely
that graphology has validity for training performance.
28. Job Tryout Procedure (Internship)

         Next, consider the job tryout procedure. Unlike work sample tests, the job tryout
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  34

procedure can be used with entry level employees with no previous experience on the job in
question. With this procedure, applicants are hired with minimal or no screening and their
performance on the job is observed and evaluated for a certain period of time (typically 6­8
months). Those who do not meet a previously established standard of satisfactory performance
by the end of this probationary period are then terminated. If used in this manner, this procedure
can have substantial validity (.44), as shown in Table 1. However, it is very expensive to
implement, and low job performance by minimally screened probationary workers can lead to
serious economic losses. In addition, it has been our experience that supervisors are reluctant to
terminate marginal performers. Doing so is an unpleasant experience for them, and to avoid this
experience many supervisors gradually reduce the standards of minimally acceptable
performance, thus diluting the effectiveness of the procedure. Another consideration is that some
of the benefits of this method will be captured in the normal course of events even if the job
tryout procedure is not used, because clearly inadequate performers will usually be terminated
after a period of time anyway. Also, the job tryout procedure has no incremental validity over
that of GMA, because of its high correlation with GMA (.66). If this procedure were used in
connection with training programs, it would probably be called the Training Tryout Procedure.
However, we know of no cases in which this has been done.
29. The Behavior Consistency Method.

         The behavioral consistency method of evaluating previous training and experience
(McDaniel, Schmidt, & Hunter, 1988; Schmidt, Caplan, et al., 1979) is based on the well-
established psychological principle that the best predictor of future performance is past
performance. In developing this method, the first step is to determine what achievement and
accomplishment dimensions best separate top job performers from low performers. This is done
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  35

on the basis of information obtained from experienced supervisors of the job in question, using a
special set of procedures (Schmidt, Caplan, et al., 1979). Applicants are then asked to describe
(in writing or sometimes orally) their past achievements that best illustrate their ability to
perform these functions at a high level (e.g., organizing people and getting work done through
people). These achievements are then scored with the aid of scales that are anchored at various
points by specific scaled achievements that serve as illustrative examples or anchors

         Use of the behavioral consistency method is not limited to applicants with previous
experience on the job in question. Previous experience on jobs that are similar to the current job
in only very general ways typically provides adequate opportunity for demonstration of
achievements. In fact, the relevant achievements can sometimes be demonstrated through
community, school, political, and other nonjob activities. However, some young people just
leaving secondary school may not have had adequate opportunity to demonstrate their capacity
for the relevant achievements and accomplishments; the procedure might work less well in such
groups.

         A behavioral consistency procedure can be time consuming and costly to create.
Considerable work is required to construct the procedure and the scoring system; applying the
scoring procedure to applicant responses is also more time consuming than scoring of most tests
with clear right and wrong answers. However, especially for higher level jobs, the behavioral
consistency method may be well worth the cost and effort in situations in which it is not possible
to use a GMA test. As shown in Table 1, this procedure has a validity of .45 for predicting job
performance but produces no incremental validity over that of GMA, due to its substantial
correlation with GMA. No information is available on the validity the behavioral consistency
procedure for predicting performance in training programs.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  36

30. Job Knowledge Tests
         The next procedure in Table 1 is job knowledge tests. Like work sample measures, job

knowledge tests cannot be used to evaluate and hire inexperienced workers. An applicant cannot
be expected to have mastered the job knowledge required to perform a particular job unless he or
she has previously performed that job or has received schooling, education, or training for that
job. But applicants for jobs such as carpenter, welder, accountant, and chemist can be
administered job knowledge tests. Job knowledge tests are often constructed by the hiring
organization on the basis of an analysis of the tasks that make up the job. Constructing job
knowledge tests in this manner is generally somewhat more time consuming and expensive than
constructing typical structured interviews. However, such tests can also be purchased
commercially; for example, tests are available that measure the job knowledge required of
machinists (knowledge of metal cutting tools and procedures). Other examples are tests of
knowledge of basic organic chemistry and tests of the knowledge required of roofers. In an
extensive meta-analysis, Dye, Reck and McDaniel (1993) found that commercially purchased
job knowledge tests ("off the shelf" tests) had slightly lower validity than job knowledge tests
tailored to the job in question. The validity figure of .48 in Table 1 for job knowledge tests is for
tests tailored to the job in question.

         As shown in Table 1, job knowledge tests do not increment validity over that of GMA,
because their high correlations with GMA. For the same reasons indicated earlier for job sample
tests, job knowledge tests typically have not been used to predict performance in training
programs. Hence, validity information is unavailable for this criterion, and there is no entry in
Table 2 for job knowledge tests.
31. Age
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  37

         Table 1 shows that age of job applicants shows no validity for predicting job
performance. Age is rarely used as a basis for hiring, and in fact in the United States, use of age
for individuals over age 40 would be a violation of the federal law against age discrimination.
We include age here for only two reasons. First, some individuals believe age is related to job
performance. We show here that for typical jobs this is not the case. Second, age serves to anchor
the bottom end of the validity dimension: Age is about as totally unrelated to job performance as
any measure can be. No meta-analyses relating age to performance in job training programs were
found. Although it is possible that future research will find that age is negatively related to
performance in job training programs (as is widely believed), we note that job experience, which
is positively correlated with age, is not correlated with performance in training programs (see
Table 2).

                                           An Important Question
         Finally, we address an issue that some in our field have raised (e.g., Arthur & Villado,
2008). As discussed in more detail in the next section, some of the personnel measures we have
examined (e.g., GMA and conscientiousness measures) are measures of single psychological
constructs, whereas others (e.g., biodata and assessment centers) are methods rather than
constructs. It is conceivable that a method such as the assessment center, for example, could
measure different constructs or combinations of constructs in different applications in different
organizations. Some would, therefore, question whether it is meaningful to compare the
incremental validities of different methods (e.g., comparing the incremental validities produced
by the structured interview and the assessment center). There are two responses to this. First, this
article is concerned with personnel measures as used in the real world of employment. Hence,
from that point of view, such comparisons of incremental validities would be meaningful, even if
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  38

they represented only crude average differences in incremental validities.
         However, the situation is not that grim. The empirical evidence indicates that such

methods as interviews, assessment centers, and biodata measures do not vary much from
application to application in the constructs they measure. This can be seen from the fact that
meta-analysis results show that variability of validity across studies (applications) of different
jobs, after the appropriate corrections for sampling error and other statistical and measurement
artifacts, is quite small (cf. Gaugler et al., 1987; McDaniel et al., 1994; Schmidt & Rothstein,
1994). In fact, these standard deviations are often even smaller than those for construct-based
measures such as GMA and conscientiousness (Schmidt & Rothstein, 1994). Hence, the situation
appears to be this: We do not know exactly what combination of constructs is measured by
methods such as the assessment center, the interview, and biodata, but whatever those
combinations are, they do not appear to vary much from one application or study to another. If
they did vary, one would expect the resulting validities to vary but they don't. Hence,
comparisons of their relative incremental validities over GMA is in fact meaningful. These
incremental validities can be expected to be stable across different applications of the methods to
different jobs in different organizations and settings.

                     Toward a Theory of the Determinants of Job Performance
         Earlier sections in this paper summarized what is known from cumulative empirical
research about the validity of various personnel measures for predicting future job performance
and job-related learning of job applicants. These findings are based on thousands of research
studies performed over the last century and involving millions of employees and job applicants.
They are a tribute to the power of empirical research, integrated using meta-analysis methods, to
produce precise estimates of relationships of interest and practical value. However, the goals of
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  39

personnel psychology include more than a delineation of relationships that are practically useful
in selecting employees. There is also a focus on development of theories of the causes of job
performance (Schmidt & Hunter, 1992). The objective is the understanding of the psychological
processes underlying and determining job performance. This endeavor is possible because
application of meta-analysis to research findings has provided the kind of precise and
generalizable estimates of the validity of different measured constructs for predicting job
performance that are summarized in this paper. It has also provided more precise estimates than
previously available of the correlations among these predictors.

         However, the theories of job performance that have been developed and tested do not
include a role for all of the personnel measures discussed above. That is because the actual
constructs measured by some of these procedures are unknown, and it seems certain that some of
these procedures measure combinations of constructs (Hunter & Hunter, 1984; Schmidt &
Rothstein, 1994). For example, employment interviews probably measure a combination of
previous experience, mental ability, and a number of personality traits, such as
conscientiousness; in addition, they may measure specific job-related skills and behavior
patterns. The average correlation between scores on unstructured interviews and scores on GMA
tests is .31 (see note c to Table 1). This indicates that, to some extent, interview scores reflect
mental ability. Little empirical evidence is available as to what other traits they measure
(Huffcutt et al., 1996). What has been said here of employment interviews also applies to peer
ratings, the behavioral consistency method, reference checks, biographical data measures,
assessment centers, and the point method of evaluating past training and experience. Procedures
such as these can be used as practical selection tools but, because their construct composition is
unknown, they are less useful in constructing theories of the determinants of job performance.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  40

The measures that have been used in theories of job performance have been GMA, job
knowledge, job experience, and personality traits. This is because it is fairly clear what
constructs each of these procedures measures.

         What has this research revealed about the determinants of job performance? A detailed
review of this research can be found in Schmidt and Hunter (1992); here we summarize only the
most important findings. One major finding concerns the reason why GMA is such a good
predictor of job performance. The major direct causal impact of GMA has been found to be on
the acquisition of job knowledge. That is, the major reason more intelligent people have higher
job performance is that they acquire job knowledge more rapidly and acquire more of it; and it is
this knowledge of how to perform the job that causes their job performance to be higher (Hunter,
1986). Thus, GMA has its most important effect on job performance indirectly, through job
knowledge. There is also a direct effect of mental ability on job performance independent of job
knowledge, but it is smaller for most jobs. For nonsupervisory jobs, this direct effect is only
about 20% as large as the indirect effect; however, for supervisory jobs, it is about 50% as large
(Borman, White, Pulakos, & Oppler, 1991; Schmidt, Hunter, & Outerbridge, 1986).

         It has also been found that job experience operates in this same manner. Job experience is
essentially a measure of practice on the job and hence a measure of opportunity to learn. The
major direct causal effect of job experience is on job knowledge, just as is the case for mental
ability. Up to about 5 years on the job, increasing job experience leads to increasing job
knowledge (Schmidt, Hunter, & Outerbridge, 1986), which, in turn, leads to improved job
performance. So the major effect of job experience on job performance is indirect, operating
through job knowledge. Again, there is also a direct effect of job experience on job performance,
but it is smaller than the indirect effect through job knowledge (about 30% as large).
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  41

         The major personality trait that has been studied in causal models of job performance is
conscientiousness. This research has found that, controlling for mental ability, employees who
are higher in conscientiousness develop higher levels of job knowledge, probably because highly
conscientious individuals exert greater efforts and spend more time "on task." This job
knowledge, in turn, causes higher levels of job performance. From a theoretical point of view,
this research suggests that the central determining variables in job performance are GMA, job
experience (i.e., opportunity to learn), and the personality trait of conscientiousness. This is
consistent with our conclusion that a combination of a GMA test and an integrity test (which
measures mostly conscientiousness) has the highest high validity (.78) for predicting job
performance. Another combination with high validity (.76) is GMA plus a structured interview,
which may in part measure conscientiousness and related personality traits (such as
agreeableness and emotional stability, which are also measured in part by integrity tests)

                                     Additional Considerations
When GMA Measures cannot be used
There are some situations in which it may not be feasible to use measures of GMA in hiring. For
example, higher level managers applying for jobs may insist on being evaluated based on their
past achievements. They may readily accept employment interviews, the Behavioral Consistency
Method, work sample tests (such as the In-Basket test), or an assessment center, but balk at test
of general intelligence, viewing it as less relevant. This may also be true of difficult-to-recruit
skilled tradespeople, such as skilled machine repairmen, computer programmers, machinists, and
the like. In situations like this, employers should focus on the zero order operational validities in
Tables 1 and 2 rather than the incremental validity values. Non-GMA procedures with high zero
order validities include employment interviews, job knowledge tests, the Behavioral Consistency
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  42

Method, and work sample tests.
Selection Fairness and Adverse Impact

         A full treatment of questions related to gender or minority subgroups are beyond the
scope of this study. These issues include questions of differential validity by subgroups,
predictive fairness for subgroups, and subgroup differences in mean score on selection
procedures. An extensive existing literature addresses these questions (cf. Hunter & Schmidt,
1996; Ones et al., 1993; Schmidt, 1988; Schmidt & Hunter, 1981; Schmidt, Ones, & Hunter,
1992; Wigdor & Garner, 1982). However, the general findings of this research literature can be
summarized here.

         For differential validity, the general finding has been that validities (the focus of this
study) do not differ appreciably for different subgroups (Hartigan & Wigdor, 1989; Hunter,
Schmidt, & Hunter, 1979; Rothstein & McDaniel, 1992; Schmidt, Berner, & Hunter, 1973). For
predictive fairness, the usual finding has been a lack of predictive bias for minorities and women
(Schmidt & Hunter, 1981). That is, given similar scores on selection procedures, later job
performance is similar regardless of group membership and regardless of how job performance is
measured (objectively or via supervisor ratings). On some selection procedures (in particular,
cognitive measures), subgroup differences on means are typically observed. On other selection
procedures (in particular, personality and integrity measures), subgroup differences are rare or
nonexistent. For many selection methods (e.g., reference checks and evaluations of education
and experience), there is little data on group differences (Hunter & Hunter, 1984). For many
purposes, the most relevant finding is the finding of lack of predictive bias. That is, even when
subgroups differ in mean score, selection procedure scores appear to have the same implications
for later performance for individuals in all subgroups (Wigdor & Garner, 1982; Schmidt &
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  43

Hunter, 1981). That is, the predictive interpretation of scores is the same in different subgroups.
         Despite the research demonstration of predictive fairness for selection methods, there are

often mean score differences between different demographic groups, such as black and white job
applicants, leading to differential hiring rates. When hiring rates are lower for minority or female
applicants, this is referred to as "adverse impact" in the context of U.S. legal regulations. (These
regulations are absent or different in other countries.) There are often large enough black-white
differences in GMA test scores to produce differential hiring rates and hence adverse impact. In
terms of sex differences, it has been found that there is no difference in mean levels of GMA
between males and females (Ployhart & Holtz, 2008; Schmidt, 2011), although there are some
well-known sex differences in specific aptitudes (i.e., higher mean scores for females in verbal
fluency and higher mean scores for males in spatial rotation). Though we mention differences in
specific aptitudes, we do not recommend the use of specific abilities in staffing contexts, given that
the validity of GMA is higher than that of specific aptitudes--even when specific aptitudes are
chosen to match the most important aspects of job performance (i.e., spatial perception for
mechanical jobs; cf. Schmidt, 2011). The research surrounding questions of ethnic group
differences in test scores is quite extensive. We refer readers who are interested in a more
technical, detailed treatment of this question to Roth, Bevier, Bobko, Switzer, and Tyler (2001);
Sackett, Schmitt, Ellingson, and Kabin (2001); Sackett, Borneman, and Connelly (2008); Schmidt
(1988); and Wigdor and Garner (1982).

         Lower hiring rates for minority applicants can lead to two potential problems: Legal risks
and decreased workplace diversity. From a legal standpoint, GMA assessments are quite defensible
in court via a demonstration that the tests are valid predictors of job performance. Such
demonstrations rely are increasingly based on summaries of the kinds of research findings
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  44

discussed in this paper, rather than on studies conducted by the employer. This is part of the
movement away from the false notion of situationally specific validity, as discussed earlier. Since
around the mid-1980s, employers have been winning more and more such suits, and today they
prevail in 90% or more of such suits. A key fact is that today there are far fewer such suits.
Currently, less than 1% of employment-related lawsuits are challenges to selection tests or other
hiring procedures, and from a purely economic standpoint, research shows that the value of the
increases in job performance from good selection practices overshadows any potential costs
stemming from defending against such suits. Thus, there is little legal risk stemming from the use
of GMA assessments.

         However, solving the problem of legal defensibility still leaves the potential problem of
workplace diversity, given that many hiring managers seek to increase the diversity of their
workforce. Sackett and colleagues (2001) explain that emphasizing GMA assessments in selection
with the purpose of maximizing job performance typically results in a lower ratio of minority hires,
while eschewing the use of GMA assessments with the purpose of increasing workplace diversity
typically results in a decrease in job performance. These authors go on to ask, "What are the
prospects for achieving diversity without sacrificing the predictive accuracy and content relevancy
present in knowledge, skill, ability, and achievement tests?" (p. 303). Over the years, employers
have tried to reduce differences in hiring rates through a variety of strategies--adjusting test scores
to minimize between-group differences in scores, assigning more weight to predictors associated
with less adverse impact, and using more non-cognitive selection methods--but none of these
strategies have been really effective (Ployhart & Holtz, 2008); also, some of the strategies, such as
score adjustments, are illegal in the U.S. Along these lines, Pyburn, Ployhart, and Kravitz write,
"...an organization might use a less valid selection procedure simply because it has less adverse
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  45

impact. Doing so violates no laws, but it fails to capitalize on over 80 years of research that has
shown valid selection procedures can enhance job performance and utility" (2008, p. 150). Some
have advocated as a solution to this problem the use of GMA assessments supplemented with the
use of non-cognitive predictors such as structured interviews, integrity tests, or measures of
conscientiousness that show little, if any, group differences. The idea is that a composite battery of
predictors could be assembled that not only will be an excellent predictor of job performance, but
also will help reduce group differences associated with GMA measures. However, Sacket et al.
(2001) showed that this approach produces only very small reductions in differential hiring rates.
Applicant reactions

         Consider the following question: Can the use of valid assessment methods during the hiring
process be a detriment to a firm's recruitment efforts because job applicants do not like the
methods used? This question might be most relevant to tests of GMA since it is the most valid
predictor of job and training performance. Fortunately for hiring managers, research on this subject
reveals that applicants perceive mental ability and GMA tests to be relevant to job performance.
Applicants generally react more favorably to GMA tests than they do to personality tests, biodata,
and integrity tests, which they view as less relevant to job performance (Anderson, Salgado, &
Hülsheger, 2010; Hausknecht, Day, & Thomas, 2004). Anderson et al. (2010) found that applicants
were most favorable towards work samples and interviews, but they also had a favorable view of
GMA tests. In fact, although GMA tests were not applicants' most preferred selection method, they
viewed GMA as being the most scientifically valid and as being the most respectful of their
personal privacy (Anderson, et al., 2010).

         Interestingly, Anderson et al. (2010) found that when GMA or other mental ability tests are
used, applicants perceive the selection requirements as being more stringent, which increases their
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  46

perceptions of the status and attractiveness of the job in question. The conclusion is this: Job
applicants generally respond well to GMA tests and other selection methods when they believe
they are relevant to job performance, and there is strong correlation between the validity of
selection method and favorable applicant reactions to the methods (Anderson et al, 2010).

                                          Limitations of This Study
         This article examined the multivariate validity of only certain predictor combinations:
combinations of two predictors with one of the two being GMA. Organizations sometimes use
more than two selection methods. For example, when hiring an entry level manager an
organization might combine the GMA score, interview score, Conscientiousness score and
college GPA into some sort of composite score. Therefore, it might be informative to examine
the incremental validity resulting from adding these three predictors to GMA. For some
purposes, it would also be of interest to examine predictor combinations that do not include
GMA. However, the absence of the needed estimates of predictor inter-correlations in the
literature makes this impossible at the present time. In the future, as data accumulates, such
analyses may become feasible. However, based on the results reported in this study, it is likely
that the incremental validity of additional predictors beyond GMA and, say, a structured
interview, would be limited.
         In fact, even within the context of the present study, some of the estimates of the
correlation between supplemental predictors and GMA measures could not be made as precise as
would be ideal, at least in comparison to those estimates that are based on the results of major
meta-analyses. For example, the job tryout procedure is similar to an extended job sample test. In
the absence of data estimating the job tryout­GMA correlation, this correlation was estimated as
being the same as the job sample­GMA correlation. It is to be hoped that future research will
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  47

provide more precise estimates of this and other correlations between GMA and other personnel
measures.

                                         Summary and Implications
         Employers must make hiring decisions; they have no choice about that. But they can
choose which methods to use in making those decisions. The research evidence summarized in
this article shows that different methods and combinations of methods have very different
validities for predicting future job performance. Some, such as person-job fit, person-
organization fit, and amount of education, have low validity. Others, such as graphology, have
essentially no validity; they are equivalent to hiring randomly. Still others, such as GMA tests
and integrity tests, have high validity. Of the combinations of predictors examined, two stand out
as being both practical to use for most hiring and as having high composite validity: the
combination of a GMA test and an integrity test (composite validity of .78); and the combination
of a GMA test and a structured interview (composite validity of .76). Both of these combinations
can be used with applicants with no previous experience on the job (entry level applicants), as
well as with experienced applicants. Both combinations predict performance in job training
programs quite well (.78 and .72, respectively), as well as performance on the job. And both
combinations are less expensive to use than many other combinations. Hence, both are excellent
choices. However, in particular cases there might be reasons why an employer might choose to
use one of the other combinations with high, but slightly lower, validity, for example, the
combination of a conscientiousness test with a GMA test.
         Researchers have used cumulative research findings on the validity of predictors of job
performance to create and test theories of job performance. These theories are now shedding
light on the psychological processes that underlie observed predictive validity and are advancing
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  48

basic understanding of human competence in the workplace.
         The validity of the personnel measure (or combination of measures) used in hiring is

directly proportional to the practical value of the method--whether measured in dollar value of
increased output or percentage increase in output. In economic terms, the gains from increasing
the validity of hiring methods can amount over time to literally millions of dollars. However, this
can be viewed from the opposite point of view: By using selection methods with low validity, an
organization can lose millions of dollars in reduced production, reducing revenue and profits.

         In fact, many employers, both in the United States and throughout the world, are
currently using suboptimal selection methods. For example, many organizations in France,
Israel, and some other countries hire new employees based on handwriting analyses by
graphologists. And in the U.S. many organizations rely on measures of "emotional intelligence",
person-job fit, or person-organization fit measures. In a competitive world, these organizations
are unnecessarily creating a competitive disadvantage for themselves (Schmidt, 1993). By
adopting more valid hiring procedures, they could turn this competitive disadvantage into a
competitive advantage.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  49

                                                     Footnote
1. Recently another procedure for correcting for indirect range restriction has appeared (Le, Oh,
Schmidt, & Wooldridge, in press). Use of this method in job selection research requires
knowledge of an essentially unknowable value, the unrestricted standard deviation (SD) of the
job performance measure (i.e., the SD of job performance in the applicant pool), making it
impossible to use in selection research. However, it can be used in many areas of organizational
research where estimates of the unrestricted SD of the dependent variable (e.g., job satisfaction
or organizational commitment) are available. Simulation studies show it is very accurate in such
areas (Le et al., in press).
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  50

                                                    References
Anderson, N., Salgado, J. F., & Hülsheger, U. R. (2010). Applicant reactions in selection:

         Comprehensive meta- analysis into reaction generalization versus situational specificity.
         International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 18, 291-304.
Arthur, W. Jr., Bell, S. T., Villado, A. J., & Doverspike, D. (2006). The use of person-
         organization fit in employment decision making: An assessment of its criterion-related
         validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 786-801.
Arthur, W. Jr., Day, E. A., McNelly, T. L., & Edens, P. S. (2003). A meta-analysis of the
         criterion-related validity of assessment center dimensions. Personnel Psychology, 56,
         125-153.
Arthur Jr, W., & Villado, A. J. (2008). The importance of distinguishing between constructs and
         methods when comparing predictors in personnel selection research and practice. Journal
         of Applied Psychology, 93, 435-442.
Bangerter, A., König, C. J., Blatti, S., & Salvisberg, A. (2009). How widespread is graphology in
         personnel selection practice? A case study of job market myth. International Journal of
         Selection and Assessment, 17, 219­230.
Bar-Hillel, M., & Ben-Shakhar, G. (1986). The a priori case against graphology: Methodological
         and conceptual issues. In B.Nevo (Ed.), Scientific aspects of graphology (pp. 263­279).
         Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Ben-Shakhar, G. (1989). Nonconventional methods in personnel selection. In P.Herriot (Ed.),
         Handbook of assessment in organizations: Methods and practice for recruitment and
         appraisal (pp. 469­485). Chichester, England: Wiley.
Ben-Shakhar, G., Bar-Hillel, M., & Flug, A. (1986). A validation study of graphological
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  51

         evaluations in personnel selection. In B.Nevo (Ed.), Scientific aspects of graphology (pp.
         175­191). Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Ben-Shakhar, G., Bar-Hillel, M., Bilu, Y., Ben-Abba, E., & Flug, A. (1986). Can graphology
         predict occupational success? Two empirical studies and some methodological
         ruminations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 645­653.
Borman, W. C., White, L. A., Pulakos, E. D., & Oppler, S. H. (1991). Models evaluating the
         effects of ratee ability, knowledge, proficiency, temperament, awards, and problem
         behavior on supervisory ratings. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 863­872.
Boudreau, J. W. (1983a). Economic considerations in estimating the utility of human resource
         productivity improvement programs. Personnel Psychology, 36, 551­576.
Boudreau, J. W. (1983b). Effects of employee flows on utility analysis of human resource
         productivity improvement programs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68, 396­406.
Boudreau, J. W. (1984). Decision theory contributions to HRM research and practice. Industrial
         Relations, 23, 198­217.
Brody, N. (1992). Intelligence. New York: Academic Press.
Brogden, H. E. (1949). When testing pays off. Personnel Psychology, 2, 171­183.
Brown, K. G., Le, H., & Schmidt, F. L. (2006). Specific aptitude theory revisited: Is there
         incremental validity for training performance? International Journal of Selection and
         Assessment, 14, 87 ­ 100.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor analytic studies. New York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Cascio, W. F., & Silbey, V. (1979). Utility of the assessment center as a selection device.
         Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 107­118.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  52

Collins, J. M., Schmidt, F. L., Sanchez-Ku, M., Thomas, L., McDaniel, M. A., & Le, H. (2003).
         Can basic individual differences shed light on the construct meaning of assessment center
         evaluations? International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 11, 17-29.

Collins, J. M., & Schmidt, F. L. (1997). Can suppressor variables enhance criterion-related
         validity in the personality domain? Educational and Psychological Measurement, 57,
         924-936.

Conway, J. M., Jako, R. A., & Goodman, D. F. (1995). A meta-analysis of interrater and internal
         consistency reliability of selection interviews. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 565-
         579.

Cooper, M. D. (2001). Job reference immunity statutes: Prevalent but irrelevant. Cornell Journal
         of Law and Public Policy, 11, 1 ­ 68.

Cronshaw, S. F., & Alexander, R. A. (1985). One answer to the demand for accountability:
         Selection utility as an investment decision. Organizational Behavior and Human
         Decision Processes, 35, 102­118.

Dye, D. A., Reck, M., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993). The validity of job knowledge measures.
         International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 1, 153­157.

Gaugler, B. B., Rosenthal, D. B., Thornton, G. C., & Bentson, C. (1987). Meta-analysis of
         assessment center validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 493­511.

Hartigan, J. A. & Wigdor, A. K. (Eds.) (1989). Fairness in employment testing: Validity
         generalization, minority issues and the General Aptitude Test Battery. Washington, DC:
         National Academy Press.

Hausknecht, J. P., Day, D. V., & Thomas, S. C. (2004). Applicant reactions to selection
         procedures: An updated model and meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 75, 639-683.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  53

Hollander, E. P. (1956). The friendship factor in peer nominations. Personnel Psychology, 9,
         435­447.

Huffcutt, A. I., Culbertson, S. S., & Weyhrauch, W. S. (2013). Employment interview reliability:
         New meta-analytic estimates by structure and format. International Journal of Selection
         and Assessment, 21, 264 ­ 276.

Huffcutt, A. I., Roth, P. L., & McDaniel, M. A. (1996). A meta-analytic investigation of
         cognitive ability in employment interview evaluations: Moderating characteristics and
         implications for incremental validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 459­473.

Hunter, J. E. (1980). Validity generalization for 12,000 jobs: An application of synthetic validity
         and validity generalization to the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB). Washington,
         DC: U.S. Department of Labor, Employment Service.

Hunter, J. E. (1986). Cognitive ability, cognitive aptitudes, job knowledge, and job performance.
         Journal of Vocational Behavior, 29, 340­362.

Hunter, J. E., & Hunter, R. F. (1984). Validity and utility of alternative predictors of job
         performance. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 72­98.

Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1982). Fitting people to jobs: The impact of personnel selection
         on national productivity. In E. A. Fleishman & M. D.Dunnette (Eds.), Human
         performance and productivity. Volume I: Human capability assessment (pp. 233­284).
         Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1983). Quantifying the effects of psychological interventions on
         employee job performance and work force productivity. American Psychologist, 38, 473­
         478.

Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1990). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  54

         research findings. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1996). Intelligence and job performance: Economic and social

         implications. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 2, 447­472.
Hunter, J. E., Schmidt, F. L., & Coggin, T. D. (1988). Problems and pitfalls in using capital

         budgeting and financial accounting techniques in assessing the utility of personnel
         programs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 522­528.
Hunter, J. E., Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, R. (1979). Differential validity of employment tests by
         race: A comprehensive review and analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 721 ­ 735.
Hunter, J. E., Schmidt, F. L., & Jackson, G. B. (1982). Meta-analysis: Cumulating research
         findings across studies. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
         research findings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hunter, J. E., Schmidt, F. L., & Judiesch, M. K. (1990). Individual differences in output
         variability as a function of job complexity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 28­42.
Hunter, J. E., Schmidt, F. L., & Le, H. (2006). Implications of direct and indirect range
         restriction for meta-analysis methods and findings. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91,
         594 ­ 612.
Jansen, A. (1973). Validation of graphological judgments: An experimental study. The Hague,
         the Netherlands: Monton.
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g factor: The science of mental ability. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Judge, T. A., Jackson, C. L., Shaw, J. C., Scott, B. A., & Rich, B. L. (2007). Self-efficacy and
         work-related performance: The integral role of individual differences. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 92, 107-127.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  55

Joseph, D. L., Jinh, J., Newman, D. A., & O'Boyle, E. H. (2015). Why does self-reported
         emotional intelligence predict job performance? A meta-analytic investigation of mixed
         EI. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100, 298-342.

Joseph, D. L., & Newman, D. A. (2010). Emotional intelligence: An integrative meta-analysis
         and cascading model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 54-78.

Kristof-Brown, A. L., Zimmerman, R. D., & Johnson, E. C. (2005). Consequences of
         individuals' fit at work: A meta-analysis of person-job, person-organization, person-
         group, and person-supervisor fit. Personnel Psychology, 58, 281-342.

Le, H., & Schmidt, F. L. (2006). Correcting for indirect range restriction in meta-analysis:
         Testing a new meta-analytic procedure. Psychological Methods, 11, 416 ­ 438.

Le, H., Oh, I.-S, Schmidt, F. L., & Wooldridge, C. D. (in press). Correction for range restriction
         in meta-analysis revisited: Improvements and implications for organizational research.
         Personnel Psychology.

Levy, L. (1979). Handwriting and hiring. Dun's Review, 113, 72­79.
Marcus, B., Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2007). Personality dimensions explaining relationships

         between integrity tests and counterproductive behavior: Big five, or one in addition?.
         Personnel Psychology, 60, 1-34.
Matthews, G., Zeidner, M., & Roberts, R. D. (2002). Emotional intelligence: Science or myth?
         Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mayer, J. D., Salovey, P., Caruso, D. R., & Sitarenios, G. (2003). Measuring emotional
         intelligence with the MSCEIT V2.0. Emotion, 3, 97 ­ 105.
McDaniel, M. A., Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1988). A meta-analysis of the validity of
         methods for rating training and experience in personnel selection. Personnel Psychology,
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  56

         41, 283­314.
McDaniel, M. A., Whetzel, D. L., Schmidt, F. L., & Mauer, S. D. (1994). The validity of

         employment interviews: A comprehensive review and meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 79, 599­616.
McDaniel, M. A., Hartman, N. S., Whetzel, D. L. & Grubb. W. L., III (2007). Situational
         judgment tests, response instructions and validity: A meta-analysis. Personnel
         Psychology, 60, 63-91.
Murphy, K. R. (2006). A critique of emotional intelligence: What are the problems and how can
         they be fixed? London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Neter, E., & Ben-Shakhar, G. (1989). The predictive validity of graphological inferences: A
         meta-analytic approach. Personality and Individual Differences, 10, 737­745.
Nye, C. D., Su, R., Rounds, J., & Drasgow, F. (2012). Vocational interests and performance: A
         quantitative summary of over 60 years of research. Perspectives on Psychological
         Science, 7, 384-403.
Oh, I.-S., Postlethwaite, B. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2013). Rethinking the validity of interviews for
         employment decision making: Implications of recent developments in meta-analysis. In
         D. J. Svyantek & K. Mahoney (Eds.), Received wisdom, kernels of truth, and boundary
         conditions in organizational studies. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. Chapter
         12, pp. 297 ­ 329.
Oh, I.-S., Wang, G., & Mount, M. K. (2011). Validity of observer ratings of the Five-Factor
         model of personality traits: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 762-773.
Ones, D. S. (1993). The construct validity of integrity tests. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
         University of Iowa, Iowa City.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  57

Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Schmidt, F. L. (1993). Comprehensive meta-analysis of
         integrity test validities: Findings and implications for personnel selection and theories of
         job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 679­703.

Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Schmidt, F. L. (2012). Integrity tests predict counterproductive
         work behaviors and job performance well: Comment on Van Iddekinge, Roth, Raymark,
         and Odle-Dusseau (2012). Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 537 ­ 542.

Passler, K., Beinicke, A., & Hell, B. (2015). Interests and intelligence: A meta-analysis.
         Intelligence, 50, 30-51.

Ployhart, R. E., & Holtz, B. C. (2008). The diversity-validity dilemma: Strategies for reducing
         racioethnic and sex subgroup differences and adverse impact in selection. Personnel
         Psychology, 61, 153-172.

Pyburn, K. M., Jr., Ployhart, R. E., & Kravitz, D. A. (2008). The diversity-validity dilemma:
         Overview and legal context. Personnel Psychology, 61, 143-151.

Rafaeli, A., & Klimoski, R. J. (1983). Predicting sales success through handwriting analysis: An
         evaluation of the effects of training and handwriting sample content. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 68, 212­217.

Ree, M. J., & Earles, J. A. (1992). Intelligence is the best predictor of job performance. Current
         Directions in Psychological Science, 1, 86­89.

Robbins, S.B., Lauver, K., Le, H., Davis, D., Langley, R., & Carlstrom, A. (2004). Do
         psychosocial and study skill factors predict college outcomes? A meta-analysis.
         Psychological Bulletin, 130, 261-288.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  58

Roth, P. L., Bevier, C. A., Bobko, P., Switzer, III, F. S., & Tyler, P. (2001). Ethnic group
         differences in cognitive ability in employment and educational settings: A meta-analysis.
         Personnel Psychology, 54, 297-330.

Roth, P. L., BeVier, C. A., Switzer, F. S., & Schippmann, J. (1996). Meta-analyzing the
         relationship between grades and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81(5),
         548-556.

Roth, P. L., Bobko, P., & McFarland, L. A. (2005). A meta-analysis of work sample test validity:
         Updating and integrating some classic literature. Personnel Psychology, 58, 1009-1037.

Rothstein, H. R., & McDaniel, M. A. (1992). Differential validity by sex in employment settings.
         Journal of Business and Psychology, 7, 45-62.

Rothstein, H. R., Schmidt, F. L., Erwin, F. W., Owens, W. A., & Sparks, C. P. (1990).
         Biographical data in employment selection: Can validities be made generalizable?
         Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 175­184.

Rynes, S. L., Colbert, A. E., & Brown, K. G. (2002). HR professionals' beliefs about effective
         human resource practices: Correspondence between research and practice. Human
         Resource Management, 41, 149 ­ 174.

Rynes, S. L., Giluk, T. L., & Brown, K. G. (2007). The very separate worlds of academic and
         practitioner periodicals in human resource management: Implications for evidence-based
         management. Academy of Management Journal, 50, 987 ­ 1008.

Sackett, P. R., Borneman, M. J., & Connelly, B. S. (2008). High stakes testing in higher
         education and employment: Appraising the evidence for validity and fairness. American
         Psychologist, 63, 215-227.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  59

Sackett, P. R., & Schmitt, N. (2012). On reconciling conflicting meta-analytic findings
         regarding integrity test validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 550-556.

Sackett, P. R., Schmitt, N., Ellingson, J. E., & Kabin, M. B. (2001). High-stakes testing in
         employment, credentialing, and higher education: Prospects in a post-affirmative-action
         world. American Psychologist, 56, 302-318.

Salgado, J. F., & Moscoso, S. (2002). Comprehensive meta-analysis of the construct validity of
         the employment interview. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology,
         11, 299-324.

Schmidt, F. L. (1988). The problem of group differences in ability test scores in employment
         selection. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 33, 272­292.

Schmidt, F. L. (1992). What do data really mean? Research findings, meta-analysis, and
         cumulative knowledge in psychology. American Psychologist, 47, 1173­1181.

Schmidt, F. L. (1993). Personnel psychology at the cutting edge. In N. Schmitt & W. Borman
         (Eds.), Personnel selection (pp. 497­515). San Francisco: Jossey Bass.

Schmidt, F. L. (2002). The role of general cognitive ability and job performance: Why there
         cannot be a debate. Human Performance, 15, 187 ­ 210.

Schmidt, F. L. (2011). A theory of sex differences in technical aptitude and some supporting
         evidence. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 560 ­ 573.

Schmidt, F. L., Berner, J. G., & Hunter, J. E. (1973). Racial differences in validity of
         employment tests: Reality or illusion? Journal of Applied Psychology, 58, 5 ­ 9.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hoffman, B. (1973). Empirical comparison of three methods of assessing
         utility of a selection device. Journal of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 1, 13 ­
         22.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  60

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1977). Development of a general solution to the problem of
         validity generalization. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62, 529­540.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1981). Employment testing: Old theories and new research
         findings. American Psychologist, 36, 1128­1137.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1983). Individual differences in productivity: An empirical test
         of estimates derived from studies of selection procedure utility. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 68, 407­414.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1992). Development of a causal model of processes determining
         job performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 1, 89­92.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity and utility of selection methods in personnel
         psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of research findings.
         Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262-274.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (2015). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
         research findings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Schmidt, F. L., & Rothstein, H. R. (1994). Application of validity generalization methods of
         meta-analysis to biographical data scores in employment selection. In G. S. Stokes, M. D.
         Mumford, & W. A. Owens (Eds.), The biodata handbook: Theory, research, and
         applications (pp. 237­260). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Schmidt, F. L., & Zimmerman, R. D. (2004). A counterintuitive hypothesis about employment
         interview validity and some supporting evidence. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89,
         553-561.

Schmidt, F. L., Caplan, J. R., Bemis, S. E., Decuir, R., Dunn, L., & Antone, L. (1979).
         Development and evaluation of behavioral consistency method of unassembled
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  61

         examining (Tech. Rep. No. 79-21). U.S. Civil Service Commission, Personnel Research
         and Development Center.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., & Outerbridge, A. N. (1986). Impact of job experience and ability
         on job knowledge, work sample performance, and supervisory ratings of job
         performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 432­439.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., & Pearlman, K. (1981). Task differences as moderators of aptitude
         test validity in selection: A red herring. Journal of Applied Psychology, 66, 166­185.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., & Pearlman, K. (1982). Assessing the economic impact of
         personnel programs on workforce productivity. Personnel Psychology, 35, 333­347.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., McKenzie, R. C., & Muldrow, T. W. (1979). The impact of valid
         selection procedures on work-force productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64,
         609­626.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., Outerbridge, A. N., & Trattner, M. H. (1986). The economic impact
         of job selection methods on size, productivity, and payroll costs of the federal work force:
         An empirically based demonstration. Personnel Psychology, 39, 1­29.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., Outerbridge, A. N., & Goff, S. (1988). Joint relation of experience
         and ability with job performance: Test of three hypotheses. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 73, 46­57.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., Pearlman, K., & Shane, G. S. (1979). Further tests of the Schmidt-
         Hunter Bayesian validity generalization procedure. Personnel Psychology, 32, 257­281.
Schmidt, F. L., Law, K., Hunter, J. E., Rothstein, H. R., Pearlman, K., & McDaniel, M. (1993).
         Refinements in validity generalization methods: Implications for the situational
         specificity hypothesis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 3­13.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  62

Schmidt, F. L., Mack, M. J., & Hunter, J. E. (1984). Selection utility in the occupation of U.S.
         Park Ranger for three modes of test use. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 490­497.

Schmidt, F. L., Oh, I.-S., & Le, H. (2006). Increasing the accuracy of corrections for range
         restriction: Implications for selection procedure validities and other research results.
         Personnel Psychology, 59, 281 ­ 305.

Schmidt, F. L., Ones, D. S., & Hunter, J. E. (1992). Personnel selection. Annual Review of
         Psychology, 43, 627­670.

Schmidt, F. L., Ones, D. S., & Viswesvaran, C. (1994, June 30­July 3). The personality
         characteristic of integrity predicts job training success. Presented at the 6th Annual
         Convention of the American Psychological Society, Washington, DC.

Schmidt, F. L., & Rader, M. (1999). Exploring the boundary conditions for interview validity:
         Meta-analytic validity findings for a new interview type. Personnel Psychology, 52, 445-
         464.

Schmidt, F. L., Shaffer, J. A., & Oh, I.-S. (2008). Increased accuracy of range restriction
         corrections: Implications for the role of personality and general mental ability in job and
         training performance. Personnel Psychology, 61, 827-868.

Shaffer, J. A., & Postlethwaite, B. E. (2012). A matter of context: A meta-analytic investigation
         of the relative validity of contextualized and noncontextualized personality measures.
         Personnel Psychology, 65, 445-494.

Steiner, D. D. (1997). International forum. The Industrial-Organizational Psychologist, 34, 51­
         53.

Steiner, D. D., & Gilliland, S. W. (1996). Fairness reactions to personnel selection techniques in
         France and the United States. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 134­141.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  63

Sturman, M. C. (2003). Searching for the inverted U-shaped relationship between time and
         performance: Meta-analyses of the experience/performance, tenure/performance, and
         age/performance relationships. Journal of Management, 29, 609-640.

Van Iddekinge, C. H., Roth, P. L., Putka, D. J., & Lanivich, S. E. (2011). Are you interested? A
         meta-analysis of relations between vocational interests and employee performance and
         turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 1167-1194.

Van Iddekinge, C. H., Roth, P. L., Raymark, P. H., & Odle-Dusseau, H. N. (2012a). The
         criterion-related validity of integrity tests: An updated meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
         Psychology, 97, 499-530.

Van Iddekinge, C. H., Roth, P. L., Raymark, P. H., Odle-Drusseau, H. N. (2012b). The critical
         role of the research question, inclusion criteria, and transparency in meta-analyses of
         integrity test research: A reply to Harris et al. (2012) and Ones, Viswesvaran, and
         Schmidt (2012). Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 543-549.

Viswesvaran, C., Ones, D. S., & Schmidt, F. L. (1996). Comparative analysis of the reliability of
         job performance ratings. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 557­574.

Viswesvaran, C., Schmidt, F. L., & Ones, D. S. (2005). Is there a general factor in ratings of job
         performance? A meta-analytic framework for disentangling substantive and error
         influences. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 108-131.

Thorndike, R. L. (1949). Personnel selection. New York: Wiley.
Waters, L. K., & Waters, C. W. (1970). Peer nominations as predictors of short-term sales

         performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 54, 42­44.
Wigdor, A. K.Garner, W. R. (Eds.). (1982). Ability testing: Uses, consequences, and

         controversies. (Report of the National Research Council Committee on Ability Testing).
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods            64

Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences Press.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods                                                   65

Table 1
Operational Validity for Overall Job Performance of General Mental Ability (GMA) Combined
with a Second Supplementary Predictor Using Multiple Regression

                                                          Gain in   % gain    Standardized
                                                          validity     in
 Selection procedures/predictors  Operational   Multiple                      regression weights
                                  validity (r)      R      (R)      validity
1. GMA tests a                                                                GMA  Supple-
2. Integrity tests b                   .65         .78      .130                    ment
                                       .46
                                                                    20%       .63  .43

3. Employment interviews          .58           .76       .117      18%       .52  .43
(structured) c
                                  .58           .73       .087      13%       .49  .38
4. Employment interviews
(unstructured) d                  .31           .71       .062      10%       .64  .29
5. Interests e

6. Phone-based interviews         .46           .70       .057      9%        .56  .29
(structured) f

7. Conscientiousness g            .22           .70       .053      8%        .67  .27

8. Reference checks h             .26           .70       .050      8%        .65  .26

9. Openness to Experience i       .04           .69       .039      6%        .74  -.25

10. Biographical data j           .35           .68       .036      6%        .90  -.34

11. Job experience (years) k      .16           .68       .032      5%        .66  .21

12. Personality-based EI l        .32           .68       .029      5%        .61  .20

13. Person-organization fit m     .13           .67       .024      4%        .66  .18

14. SJT (knowledge) n             .26           .66       .015      2%        .75  -.17

15. Person-job fit o              .18           .66       .014      2%        .64  .13

16. Assessment centers p          .36           .66       .013      2%        .78  -.18

17. T & E point method q          .11           .66       .009      1%        .65  .11

18. Grade point average r         .34           .66       .009      1%        .74  -.14

19. Years of education s          .10           .65       .008      1%        .65  .10

20. Extraversion t                .09           .65       .006      1%        .65  .09

21. Peer ratings u                .49           .65       .006      1%        .57  .12

22. Ability-based EI v            .23           .65       .004      0%        .68  -.08

23. Agreeableness w               .08           .65       .002      0%        .64  .05

24. Work sample tests x           .33           .65       .002      0%        .68  -.06

25. SJT (behavioral tendency) y   .26           .65       .001      0%        .64  .03

26. Emotional Stability z         .12           .65       .000      0%        .64  .02

27. Graphology aa                 .02           .65       .000      0%        .65  .02

28. Job tryout procedure ab       .44           .65       .000      0%        .63  .02

29. Behavioral consistency        .45           .65       .000      0%        .64  .02
method ac
                                  .48           .65       .000      0%        .65  -.01
30. Job knowledge tests ad

31. Age ae                        .00           .65       .000      0%        .65  .01

Note. EI = emotional intelligence; SJT = situational judgment tests; T & E = training and experience; In
the Table notes, k = the number of studies a meta-analysis is based on.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  66

Selection procedures are listed in the order of gain in operational validity (incremental validity). All
values in the third column of Table 1 are operational validities for overall job performance. Unless
otherwise noted, all operational validity estimates are corrected for measurement error in the criterion
measure and indirect range restriction (IRR) on the predictor measure to estimate operational validity for
applicant populations. Details on these operational validities are reported in the Table footnotes. The
correlations between GMA and supplementary predictors (used to compute multiple Rs, gain in validity,
and standardized regression weights) are corrected for IRR on GMA but not for measurement error in
either measure; these correlations indicate unrestricted observed correlations between the two predictors
in applicant populations. Details on these correlations are reported in the Table footnotes.

a From Schmidt, Shaffer, and Oh (2008, Table 3). This operational validity is based on eight individual
meta-analytic estimates reported in Table 1 on p. 838. The average across these eight meta-analytic
estimates (.65) is presented in Table 3 on p. 843.

b From Ones, Viswesvaran, and Schmidt (1993, Table 8). This operational validity is based on predictive
studies conducted on job applicants. The authors of a more recent meta-analysis (Van Iddekinge, Roth,
Raymark, and Odle-Dusseau were unable to access many of the studies contained in Ones et al. (1993).
We report results based on Ones et al. (1993) because their paper is based on a much larger and more
complete set of studies (k = 222 vs. k = 134). The interested readers can refer to a special section
published about this research in the Journal of Applied Psychology (Ones, Viswesvaran, & Schmidt 2012;
Sackett & Schmitt, 2012; Van Idddekinge, Roth, Raymark, & Odel-Dusseau, 2012b). The unrestricted
observed correlation between integrity tests and GMA is estimated at .05 (Ones, 1993, Table 30).

c From McDaniel, Whetzel, Schmidt, and Maurer (1994, Table 4, p. 606). This is the operational validity
of job-related structured employment interviews based on primary studies in which overall job
performance was measured using research-purpose measures (k = 36) and thus represents the most
unbiased estimate available. The operational validity presented here was corrected for IRR with the most
appropriate meta-analytic reliability estimate for the interview measure from Conway et al. (1995). The
unrestricted observed correlation between GMA and the structured interview is .31 (Salgado & Moscoso,
2002, Table 4).

d From McDaniel, Whetzel, Schmidt, and Maurer (1994, Table 4, p. 606). This is the operational validity
of job-related unstructured employment interviews based on primary studies in which overall job
performance was measured using research-purpose measures (k = 9) and thus represents the most
unbiased estimate available. The operational validity presented here was corrected for IRR using the most
appropriate meta-analytic reliability estimate for the interview measure from Huffcutt et al. (2013). The
unrestricted observed correlation between the unstructured interview and GMA is .41 (Salgado &
Moscoso, 2002, Table 3).

e From Van Iddekinge, Roth, Putka, and Lanivich (2011, Table 5, p. 1178). This is the operational
validity of job and vocation-focused interest scales that match the dominant interest classification of the
job in question. This value was corrected for criterion unreliability and indirect range restriction (k = 26).
Because the Nye et al. (2012) meta-analysis was based on fewer studies we did not use it. That meta-
analysis used "congruence scores", which are similar to the scale-job matching used in Van Iddekinge et
al. Nye et al. obtained a somewhat lower operational validity of .25 averaged across five interest
inventories (see their Table 1 results for task performance, p. 390). Nye et al. (2012) corrected for both
criterion unreliability and indirect range restriction. The overall, unrestricted correlation between interests
and GMA is .04 which is the average correlation between GMA and the six RIASEC interest types (r
with Realistic = .20 [R = .026]; r with Investigative = .25 [R = .018]; r with Artistic = -.02 [R = .077];
r with Social = -.16 [R = .125]; r with Enterprising = -.07 [R = .092]; r with Conventional = .01 [R =
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  67

.068]). These correlations are from Passler et al. (2015, Table 2). The GMA-interest correlations and
corresponding validity increments (R) presented in this note can be used by readers who want to focus
on specific RIASEC interest scales. Note that attainment of these incremental validities requires that
interest scale and job be matched, as described above.

f From Schmidt and Rader (1999, Table 3, p. 457). This is the operational validity of a non-traditional
type of structured employment interview in which questions and correct answers are determined
empirically based on their correlation with employee job performance. It is administered via telephone
and later scored based on a taped transcript. This type of employment interviews is cost effective because
it is conducted via telephone, not face-to-face and "applicants in widely scattered geographical locations
can be interviewed with no travel costs for interviewees or interviewers" (Schmidt & Rader, 1999, pp.
450-451). This interview was developed by the Gallup Organization and has been adopted by others. The
operational validity reported in this table is for supervisor ratings of job performance (k = 33). Given that
it is a type of structured employment interview, the unrestricted observed correlation between GMA and
this interview is expected to be .31 (Salgado & Moscoso, 2002, Table 4), as with other structured
interviews (refer to note c).

g From Schmidt, Shaffer, and Oh (2008, Table 1 and Appendices C and D). Individual meta-analytic
estimates are reported in Table 1 on pp. 838-839 and in Appendix C on pp. 866-867. The averages of
these operational validity values (ranging from .04 [Openness] to .22 [Conscientiousness]) are presented
in Appendix D on p. 868. We used the average for each personality measure in the current analyses. The
gain in validity for Openness (.039) is a bit higher than its operational validity (.036), which is due to its
higher correlation with GMA (producing statistical suppression) as compared to the other FFM
personality traits. The unrestricted observed correlations between measures of GMA and the FFM
personality trait measures are: -.069 (Conscientiousness), .000 (Extraversion), .046 (Agreeableness),
Emotional Stability (.159), and Openness to Experience (.380; Judge, Jackson, Shaw, Scott, & Bruce,
2007, Table 3). True score correlations alone were reported in Judge et al. (2007). We attenuated the true
score correlations for predictor unreliability in both variables using the psychometric information
provided by Timothy A. Judge. It is noted that the operational validity of the FFM traits has been found to
be somewhat higher than the values presented here when work-specific, contextualized measures are used
(i.e., when items or instructions are specific to work settings) than when general, non-contextualized
measured are used (Shaffer & Postlethwaite, 2012, Table 1). The operational validity of the FFM trait
personality traits has also been found to be higher when personality traits are measured using ratings by
others than by self-reports (Oh, Wang, & Mount, 2011, Table 3). The incremental validities presented in
this table are for general (standard) self-report measures of the FFM personality traits and are not these
higher values.

h From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 9, k = 10). In the absence of any available data, the unrestricted
correlation with GMA was assumed to be zero. Assumption of a larger correlation would produce a lower
incremental validity.

i Refer to note g.

j From Rothstein, Schmidt, Erwin, Owens, and Sparks (1990, Table 6). The unrestricted observed
correlation with GMA is .76 (Schmidt, 1988, p. 283). The standardized regression weight is negative due
to its high correlation with GMA (producing statistical suppression). Attainment of the incremental
validity presented here is contingent on use of the negative weight on the biodata scale.

k From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 6) and Sturman (2003, Table 1). Hunter & Hunter (1984)
reported the operational validity of .18 (k = 425) and Sturman (2003, Table 1) reported the operational
validity of .13 (k = 68). Thus, the operational validity of job experience (years) is estimated at .16 by
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  68

combining these two meta-analytic findings. The unrestricted observed correlation between GMA scores
and years of job experience is -.07 (Judge, Jackson, Shaw, Scott, & Bruce, 2007, Table 3).

l From Joseph, Jin, Newman, and O'Boyle (2015, Table 2, p. 307; k = 15). The operational validity of
personality traits-based/self-reported EI is corrected for unreliability in the criterion measure (.58, based
on Viswesvaran, Schmidt, & Ones, 2005) and indirect range restriction on the predictor measure. The
unrestricted correlation between GMA and this type of EI scale is .20 (Joseph & Newman, 2010, Table
2).

m From Arthur, Bell, Villado, and Doverspike (2006, Table 1, k = 36). No correction of this validity for
range restriction was possible. Given lack of a meta-analytic estimate for the relationship between P-O Fit
and GMA, we performed a meta-analysis in order to derive the estimate to be used in this study. The
unrestricted observed correlation between GMA and P-O Fit is -.07 (current study; k = 5); detailed results
are available from the authors upon request.

n From McDaniel, Hartman, Whetzel, & Grubb III (2007, Table 3). The operational validities of SJT
(knowledge; choosing "the best" or "should do" option; 14 in Table 1) and SJT (behavioral tendency;
choosing the "most likely to do" or "would do" option; 25 in Table 1) are the same at .26 (k = 96 and k =
22, respectively). Information needed to correct these validities for any range restriction was not
available. The difference in response instructions between these two types of SJTs is discussed in detail in
Table 2 of McDaniel et al. (2007). The unrestricted observed correlations between GMA scores and SJT
scales are .59 and .36 for SJT (knowledge) and SJT (behavioral tendency), respectively (McDaniel et al.,
2007, Table 3). The standardized regression weight for SJT (knowledge) is negative due to its high
correlation with GMA, producing statistical suppression); attainment of the small incremental validity
presented here is contingent on use of the negative regression weight.

o From Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, and Johnson (2005, Table 1, k = 19). No correction of this validity
for range restriction was possible. Given lack of a meta-analytic estimate for the relationship between P-J
fit and GMA, we performed a meta-analysis in order to derive the estimate to be used in this study. The
unrestricted observed correlation between GMA and Person-Job Fit is .07 (current study; k = 3); detailed
results are available from the authors upon request.

p From Arthur, Day, McNelly, and Edens (2003, Table 3). This is the operational validity averaged for
different dimension scores used in assessment centers (i.e., communication, consideration/awareness of
others, drive, influencing others, organizing and planning, and problem solving), against the aggregated
criterion including supervisor ratings of job performance, promotion, and salary (k = 258). The
operational validity of overall assessment center scores for supervisory ratings of job performance is also
.36 in Gaugler et al. (1987; Table 8; k = 29). The correlation between GMA and overall assessment center
scores is .71 (Collins et al., 2003). The standardized regression weight for the assessment center is
negative due to its high correlation with GMA, producing statistical suppression. The incremental validity
presented here is contingent on use of this negative weight.

q From McDaniel, Schmidt, & Hunter (1988, Table 3, k = 91). The unrestricted observed correlation
between GMA and the T &E point method is taken as zero (Schmidt & Hunter, 1998); this value is based
a judgment about the characteristics of this method (i.e., its purely credentialistic nature).

r From Roth, BeVier, Switzer, and Schippmann (1996, Table 2, p. 550). The operational validity
estimates for GPA (combination of college, graduate, and PhD/MD GPAs) and college GPA are the
same. Here, we report the operational validity of college GPA for job performance given its wider use in
employment selection decisions (k = 49). The unrestricted observed correlation between GMA and GPA
is .65 (Robbins, Lauver, Le, Davis, Langley, & Carlstrom, 2004, Table 5).
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  69

s From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 9). For purposes of these calculations, we assumed a zero
unrestricted observed correlation between GMA scores and years of education. The reader should
remember that this is the correlation within the applicant pool of individuals who apply to get a particular
job. In the general population the correlation between education and GMA scores is about .55. Even
within applicant pools there is probably at least a small positive correlation. Thus the tiny increment in
validity over GMA shown here is probably somewhat of an overestimate.

t Refer to note g.

u From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Tables 8 and 10; k = 31). The information needed to correct this
validity for range restriction was not available. The average correlation between GMA and peer rating of
job performance is approximately .50, which is increased to .65 after correcting for IRR on the GMA
measure. If peer ratings are based on an averaged rating from 10 peers, the familiar Spearman-Brown
formula indicates that the inter-rater reliability of peer ratings is approximately .90 (Viswesvaran, Ones,
& Schmidt, 1996).

v From Joseph, Jin, Newman, and O'Boyle (2015, Table 2, p. 307; k = 13). The operational validity of
ability-based EI is corrected for unreliability in the criterion measure (assumed to be .58 based on
Viswesvaran, Schmidt, & Ones, 2005) and indirect range restriction on the predictor measure. The
unrestricted correlation with GMA is .45 (Joseph & Newman, 2010, Table 2). The standardized
regression weight is negative due to its high correlation with GMA, producing statistical suppression.
Attainment of the incremental validity presented here is contingent on use of this negative regression
weight.

w Refer to note g.

x From Roth, Bobko, and McFarland (2005, Table 1, p. 1020; k = 54). This is the operational validity for
work sample tests for supervisory ratings of job performance. The unrestricted observed correlation of
work sample tests with GMA is .57 (Roth et al., 2005, Table 4). The standardized regression weight for
work sample tests is negative, albeit small, due to its high correlation with GMA measures, producing
statistical suppression; however, work sample tests produce no incremental validity over GMA measures.

y Refer to note n.

z Refer to note g.

aa From Neter and Ben-Shakher (1989), Ben-Shakhar (1989), Ben-Shakhar, Bar-Hillel, Bilu, Ben-Abba,
and Flug (1986), and Bar-Hillel and Ben-Shakhar (1986). No correction for range restriction was made on
this validity. Range restriction is unlikely here. The unrestricted observed correlation between graphology
scores and GMA is assumed to be zero.

ab From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 9). No correction of this validity for range restriction could be
made. Range restriction is unlikely for the job tryout method, given the absence of any initial screening of
applicants. The correlation between job tryout evaluations and GMA scores is estimated at .38 (Schmidt,
Hunter, & Outerbridge, 1986); that is, it was taken to be the same as the correlation between job sample
tests and GMA. Use of the mean correlation between supervisory performance ratings and GMA scores
yields a similar value (.35, uncorrected for measurement error). This correlation increases to .66 after
correcting for IRR on the GMA measure.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  70

ac From McDaniel, Schmidt, and Hunter (1988, Table 3; k = 15). No information was available that
would allow correction of this validity for range restriction. The unrestricted observed correlation
between GMA and the behavioral consistency method is .68. This is the expected value given that the
achievements measured by this procedure depend substantially on GMA, as well as on personality and
other non-cognitive characteristics.

ad From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 10; k = 10). This validity value could not be corrected for range
restriction. The observed correlation between job knowledge scores and GMA scores is .48 (Schmidt,
Hunter, & Outerbridge, 1986). The unrestricted observed correlation between job knowledge scores and
GMA scores is estimated at .75. Due to its high correlation with GMA scores, the standardized regression
weight for job knowledge) is negative, albeit only -.01, producing statistical suppression. Therefore, when
using the regression equation presented here, the weight on Job Knowledge would be nearly zero.
However, job knowledge measures produce no incremental validity over GMA measures.

ae From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 9) and Struman (2003, Table 1). Hunter & Hunter (1984)
reported the operational validity of -.01 (k = 425) and Sturman (2003, Table 1) reported a very similar
finding of .01 (k = 78). Thus, the operational validity of age is estimated at .00 by combining these two
meta-analytic findings. It is unlikely that this validity is affected by range restriction and no correction
was made. The unrestricted observed correlation of age with GMA is assumed to be zero (Schmidt &
Hunter, 1998).
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods                                                                    71

Table 2
Operational Validity for Training Performance of General Mental Ability (GMA) Combined with
a Second Supplementary Predictor Using Multiple Regression

                                                                                   Standardized

                                 Operational   Multiple  Gain in   % gain          Regression
                                 validity (r)      R     validity     in
Selection procedures/predictors                                                         weights
                                                          (R)      validity
                                                                                   GMA              Supple-
                                                                                                     ment

1. GMA tests a                   .67
2. Integrity tests b
3. Biographical data c           .43           .78       .109      16%             .65              .40

                                 .30           .74       .073      11%             1.04             -.50

4. Employment interviews         .56           .74       .070      11%             .53              .35
(unstructured) d
5. Interests e                   .34           .74       .070      11%             .66              .31

6. Conscientiousness f           .25           .73       .061      9%              .69              .29

7. Reference checks g            .23           .71       .038      6%              .67              .23

8. Employment interviews         .41           .70       .034      5%              .60              .23
(structured) h
9. Years of education i          .20           .70       .029      4%              .67              .20
10. Extraversion j
11. Assessment centers k         .17           .69       .021      3%              .67              .17
12. Peer ratings l
13. Agreeableness m              .37           .68       .014      2%              .81              -.20
14. Emotional Stability n
15. Openness to Experience o     .36           .68       .008      1%              .76              -.13
16. Job experience (years) p
                                 .13           .67       .007      1%              .66              .10

                                 .14           .67       .001      0%              .66              .03

                                 .24           .67       .000      0%              .67              -.02

                                 .00           .67       .000      0%              .67              .01

Note. Selection procedures are listed in the order of gain in operational validity. All values in the third

column of Table 2 are operational validities for training performance. Unless otherwise noted, all

operational validity estimates are corrected for measurement error in the criterion measure and indirect
range restriction (IRR) on the predictor measure to estimate operational validity for applicant populations.

Details on these operational validities are reported in the Table footnotes. The correlations between GMA

and supplementary predictors (used to compute multiple Rs, gain in validity, and standardized regression
weights) are corrected for IRR on GMA but not for measurement error in either measure; these
correlations indicate unrestricted observed correlations between the two predictors in applicant

populations. Details on these correlations are reported in the Table 1 footnotes.

a From Schmidt, Shaffer, and Oh (2008, Table 3). Individual meta-analytic estimates are reported in
Table 2 on p. 840. The average of these estimates across eight meta-analytic estimates (.67) is presented
in Table 3 on p. 843. We used this average in the current analyses.

b From Schmidt, Ones, and Viswesvaran (1994). The operational validity reported in this table has been
corrected for unreliability in the criterion measure and IRR on the predictor measure. Integrity tests have
been found to correlate with GMA scores at .05.

c From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 8). The unrestricted observed correlation between biographical
data measures and GMA scores is .76 (Schmidt, 1988). The standardized regression weight is negative
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  72

due to its high correlation with GMA, producing statistical suppression; attainment of the incremental
validity presented here is contingent on use of this negative regression weight.

d From McDaniel, Whetzel, Schmidt, and Maurer (1994, Table 5, p. 606). This is the operational validity
of job-related structured employment interviews for training performance k = 30). Also refer to note d of
Table 1.

e From Van Iddekinge et al. (2011, Table 5, p. 1178). This is the operational validity of job and vocation-
focused interest scales that match the dominant interest classification of the job. This was corrected for
criterion unreliability and indirect range restriction (k = 7). Nye et al.'s (2012) meta-analysis did not
examine the criterion of training performance.

f From Schmidt, Shaffer, and Oh (2008; Table 2 and Appendices C and D). Individual meta-analytic
validity figures for the Big Five personality measures are reported in their Table 2 on pp. 840-841 and in
Appendix C on pp. 866-867. The averages of these estimates are presented in Appendix D on p. 868. We
used these averages in the current analyses. See also note g of Table 1.

g From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 8; k = 1, N = 1,553). This validity could not be corrected for
range restriction. The correlation between reference checks and GMA scores was taken as zero.
Assumption of a larger correlation will reduce the estimate of incremental validity.

h From McDaniel, Whetzel, Schmidt, and Maurer (1994, Table 5, p. 606). This is the operational validity
of job-related structured employment interviews for training performance (k = 26). See also note c of
Table 1.

i From Hunter and Hunter (1984). Information was not available that would allow this validity to be
corrected for range restriction. For purposes of these calculations, we assumed a zero unrestricted
observed correlation between GMA and years of education. The reader should remember that this is the
correlation within the applicant pool of individuals who apply to get a particular job. In the general
population the correlation between education and GMA scores is about .55. Even within applicant pools
there is probably at least a small positive correlation. Thus the increment in validity over GMA shown
here is probably somewhat of an overestimate.

j Refer to note f.

k From Gaugler et al. (1987, Table 8). This value of .37 is the operational validity of overall assessment
center ratings performance in training (k = 8) when corrected for artifacts in the same manner as in Arthur
et al. (2003). The standardized regression weight is negative due to its high correlation with GMA,
producing statistical suppression. Attainment of the incremental validity shown here requires use of this
negative regression weight.

l From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 8; k = 7). The information needed to correct this validity for range
restriction was not available. The average correlation between GMA and peer rating of job performance is
approximately .50, which is increased to .65 after correcting for IRR on the GMA measure. If peer ratings
are based on an averaged rating from 10 peers, the familiar Spearman-Brown formula indicates that the
inter-rater reliability of peer ratings is approximately .90 (Viswesvaran, Ones, & Schmidt, 1996). The
standardized regression weight on peer ratings is negative due to its high correlation with GMA,
producing statistical suppression. Attainment of the .01 incremental validity presented here requires use
of this negative regression weight.

m Refer to note f.
Validity and Utility of Selection Methods  73

n Refer to note f.

o Refer to note f. The standardized regression weight is negative, albeit very small, due to its high
correlation with GMA, producing statistical suppression. However, standard measures of Openness to
Experience produce no incremental validity over GMA measures for the prediction of performance in
training programs.

p From Hunter and Hunter (1984, Table 6; k = 90). These calculations are based the assumption of a zero
correlation between years of job experience and GMA measures. The unrestricted observed correlation
with GMA is -.07 (Judge, Jackson, Shaw, Scott, & Bruce, 2007).
